Oh.
Yeah. (laughs) It's a week past.
We haven't seen you, have we?
Lawrence, where have you been?
Hi.
You've been- Oh, well, we're having a ball.
(laughing)
We all have the same questions.
Yeah, okay.
Haven't been taken in yet.
(laughs) Oh.
I used to live in Takanini. Where? On Te Reinga Drive
right by Omston, before that all got developed.
And that used to be my electorate, Lawrence.
Takanini?
No, Omston area. Omston.
Ah.
Well, Judith, our prime minister's given him... No.
So it's gone from me, to Judith, to the Prime
Minister. And
is... But Jenny's turned up. Oh, you've got a lot of
laboring people.
(laughing)
Hang
I don't usually
vote for them. Right. When's, when's
Colin?
Mm-hmm.
(laughs)
Yeah.
When are you going home?
Five.
Go on, Greg, sit down to there.
Hello.
(laughs)
We get it right. No.
Better than this chair.
I don't want to be rude but she's a permanent address, even if they're not.
Right, Mr. Kivawai, we are on very strict
timeframe.
You know we've got a structured agenda.
We try to roughly keep to it. Apparently you've got
six minutes, no more-
(laughs)
... w- which is expensive. But, uh, anyway, um-
Nothing interesting to say.
Welcome to you and your team. I'll let you introduce everyone but,
um, the floor is yours.
Kia ora e nga mana o te mema o te pana mata.
Kei kua whakaroahia mai nei tēnā tautou. Kia ora tatou katoa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, let me very quickly just introduce some
of my team. I've got quite a full group here but I'll, I'll just only name those
who I'm pretty confident will get called upon to support me over the next couple of
hours. Uh, on my left, you will have met Victoria Davy in this committee
before. She's our new, uh, uh Dep Sec Aoteaāringa
Strategy.
Yeah.
Uh, Andy Fullbrook, our CFO, is an old friend-
Mm-hmm.
... of this, uh, group. Uh, over here we have Ryan Orange,
who runs the Sector Directorate, and Becks Parish,
who will talk about numbers, if you have detailed question on
numbers. And these three, um,
uh, attractive looking people here-
(laughs)
... (laughs) are Dr Kelvin Watson, who's our Dep Sec, uh, Corporate-
Can we get a chair?
Uh, Karl Craifer, who is the Chief Operating Officer, and
Victoria McLachlan, who's the Dep Sec for the Digital, uh,
Transformation Waioraika program.
And there are others here who I will, uh, introduce if I need to.
Caroline Greany, our Dep Sec Policy apologizes. She'll be a little bit late- Okay.
... but, uh, she's rushing, uh, back. Uh, and I thank the committee.
I think you indulged us in- That's fine. ...
changing the agenda so that she could attend her daughter's prize giving.
Yes.
Just administratively while, while it's... If you, if you need to come up, don't...
Just wait. Come up and talk to the microphone.
Just let's not have that show of standing back.
Just come up seamlessly, right?
(laughs)
Okay. Sorry to interrupt.
No, I think, Mr. Chair, my six minutes probably starts now. (laughing) So...
No.
My rec, you've had 43 seconds. (laughing)
Look, thank you for this opportunity.
Uh, obviously we look forward to it, uh, all year.
Um, at the Ministry of Justice-
(laughs)
... our purpose-
You said that with such conviction.
(laughs)
Yeah, no sarcasm. (laughs) Slice and celly.
Our purpose is to strengthen people's trust in the law and this does
guide, uh, what we do every day. Uh, this year
we refreshed our statement of intent, uh, to provide a clearer view of our longer
term outcomes and priorities for the next four years, uh, to
ensure alignment with change in government priorities and outline
specific activities to achieve those outcomes and
priorities. Uh, our updated statement of intent identifies three
outcomes we believe define a just soc- society from, uh, our
perspective. Firstly, uh, trusted and legitimate, where people
believe in the fairness and independence of the law.
Uh, secondly, a justice system that is accessible and effective, where
justice isn't delayed and where everyone, regardless of means, can
participate meaningfully. And thirdfl- uh, thirdly, a
safe and prosperous society where people feel secure and the law
supports both social cohesion and economic
confidence. Overall, these key strategic objectives remain
consistent with what we've been working towards over the past five years.
And they're not abstract ideas. We want them to be lived realities for
all New Zealanders. We've had a really busy year in the
ministry supporting the government's focus on the justice system and law and
order, uh, noting its recent announcement that it is tracking
well ahead of the, uh, violent... victims of violent crime
target, reducing that. Uh, we're also working hard to improve timeliness
in the courts and improve our digital and physical infrastructure, and I'm
sure we'll talk more about that this afternoon.
Uh, and obviously we are managing in a constrained fiscal environment and that
does color quite a lot of our world.
Alongside our justice partners, uh, and the judiciary, we are tackling court
backlogs, recognizing the real effect that these have on victims,
defendants, and other parties. Uh, the national
backlog of criminal cases in the District Court, uh, has fallen by
27% since February '24, which is the equivalent of
around 2,200 cases. Uh, active coronial
cases have decreased by 19% in the year to October, uh, from
five and a half thousand to four and a half thousand cases.
In the Disputes Tribunal, an extra 1,200 were completed in the 12 months to
October compared to the previous year.
Uh, these examples show we can make progress on delays and backlogs.
It's felt like an intractable challenge at times, but we're, uh, really, I think,
demonstrating that we can get some traction, uh, in
it. But none of it is achieved in isolation.
It's a testament to the collective will of everyone involved.
Uh, we've also ramped up our fines and reparations collection effort.
In '24-'25, uh, $223 million
was collected. That's 50 dol- $50 million more than in
2022, uh, '23. And as a result of that,
outstanding reparation money owed to victims has dropped from, uh,
111.8 million in the year to June '24 to 104.6
million this year. Our policy team has been incredibly
busy. We've supported the government with sentencing reform, reinstated the three
strikes regime, we worked on coward punch offending, intro- introduced a new
stalking offense. Measures to tackle retail crime have been progressed
following advice from the Ministerial Advisory Group for Victims of Retail
Crime. On cybercrime, we've worked to ensure New Zealand meets the requirements of
the Budapest Convention, and we're currently leading an overhaul of the
country's anti-money laundering and countering the financing of
terrorism system.
Two phases, (clears throat) excuse me, of the government's firearms reform program
have been delivered, improvements to firearms
prohibition orders and rule changes for shooting clubs and
ranges. Work is advancing on the Arms Act rewrite, and we're helping to
move the Firearms Safety Authority to a new independent regulatory
agency. In the civil and family law space, we have ensured small
straightforward estates can be distributed without needing High Court approval
for probate. We've strengthened the Family Court's ability to address litigation
abuse, and we've supported the government to pass urgent legislation
temporarily suspending unsafe overseas adoptions.
We supported this committee's consideration of the Treaty Principles Bill,
including analysis of an unprecedented volume of public submissions,
and we've developed options to improve electoral system operations.
On the infrastructure front, we're tackling long-standing issues with both our
digital and physical infrastructure.
We're replacing the court's, uh, paper-based system with a digital case management
system, uh, Te Oreka, uh, and we're currently in the middle,
uh, or nearing the end of the build phase for the Family Court.
And there's an extensive property work program underway with several major
rebuilds and other significant projects.
Uh, we've just finished consulting and are about to finalize our latest Long Term
Insights Briefing. Our topic is the future operation of the courts and justice
services. It would be good to have an opportunity to discuss that with this
committee, uh, in the new year, if you desire
that. Uh, and, uh, clearly, uh, we're just one
part of the justice sector. Uh, we work alongside the other justice sector
agencies, Police, Corrections, Crown Law, Serious Fraud Office, and
Oranga Tamariki. We understand our interdependencies on
timeliness, the victim experience, and our infrastructure.
I'm really appreciative of the sense of shared endeavor that we have with those
other agencies. Uh, I would want to put on the record, I'm incredibly
proud of the work of all our staff, our kaimahi.
Uh, this past year, uh, we have achieved much, uh, under a tight
fiscal situation. I acknowledge our ministers, I acknowledge the
judiciary for their leadership and support.
And of course, I acknowledge this committee, uh, for the conversations that we have
on a regular basis. And-
What a wonderful thing to hear.
... I'm in your hands, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Right. I have got Mr. Todd Stevens. Todd,
Thanks. We're, we're, we're into the audit findings-
Mm-hmm.
... section of the structured agenda.
And I'm just referring to the, to the letter from the Audit Office to
your, uh, ministers, which is great.
Um, and look, I know your, you've got a very complex department.
Um, you seem to be stuck in the good zone now on the three audits, but
you can give me some comments on that in a minute.
But one thing I did want to ask, obviously, I think, uh, in both
this audit and maybe subsequent audits, there has been some comments
around, um, the, your IT control environment and your
procurement processes. So, keen just for you to give us a bit more, um,
the committee a bit more insight into how you have been addressing some of those
issues, 'cause I think that they've been raised a few times, and obviously you've
made progress, but maybe more to do.
Yeah. Um,
uh, certainly it might be worth, uh, uh, Dr.
Watson joining us at the, at the table for, for, for some of this.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, look, in, in both of those, uh, spaces, in the, in the
digital space, uh, to be honest, I, I think we have
been working through a legacy of underinvestment.
Uh, that underinvestment, uh, had meant that a lot of our systems,
uh, were out of service, uh, that they didn't fit or work well
together. And this is something that, to be honest, has occurred probably over
the l- you know, the last 15, uh,
years. Uh, we've, we've, uh, done a lot of work, have a
very active program to try and bring that, uh, up to speed.
Uh, in 2022, uh, we, uh, had a, uh, a
budget that recognized some of that deficit, uh, and that helped
us, uh, get ahead. So we are progressively going through
and, and making sure that we both, um, uh,
replace or, or close down some old systems, some legacy systems,
uh, but we ensure others are, are well, uh, supported.
Across the top of that, we've obviously got, uh, Te Oreka, uh, the digital case
management system, uh, coming in.
That, that will
be a complete change, uh, game-changer for us in the courts....
uh, and so we're looking forward to that.
Uh, procurement, I might actually get, uh, Kelvin to talk a little bit about what
we've done in the procurement space.
Uh, in particular, we have, uh, it's, it's one of the areas where we've been
using, uh, AI to, to get a better sense of just
the state of our contracts and where they're at.
And I thought, Kelvin, you might want to make any, m- any other comments about
digital as, as well, but you might want to talk about that, some of that work in
procurement.
Sure. Um, so in the procurement space, we've got...
we don't have a fully end-to-end contract management system, um, to
enable us to, to manage, uh, contracts in a, in a very good
sense. Uh, but we do have a contract database where we capture all our
contracts. And what we've been doing more recently is using lots of AI,
uh, agents to help us, um, basically bring together all
of the documentation that we've got.
So, if we've got a contract, uh, it's been a long-standing contract, a series of
variations, what the AI agents will help us do is actually go through all of those
documents and then tell us what are the...
what's the set of current, uh, contract clauses for that contract, taking all the
variations. So, we've got a number of things that we're doing, um, that are helping
us to, uh, make sure that we're robust in our, in our
commercial services practices, uh, while not having a, a fully
entailed, um, contract management system.
And just a quick couple of sups then, and obviously we're going to talk about, um,
the RF a little later. That's obviously-
Mm-hmm.
... a big project. But just, just so we get a sense, I mean, how many
other kind of technology systems is the ministry managing?
You must have many, many. I mean...
Uh, I, I'd need to, um, come back to the committee the exact numbers, but I
think we, we record something around 60 or 70 what we call critical
systems.
Yeah.
Just like our case management system, our finance system, payroll system, that sort
of thing. So there's about 70 odd that we would consider critical,
um, and then there's a further, um, that's in the hundreds in
terms of just various systems that we have, uh, that support, uh,
the overall management of, of the ministry's activities.
And so what we do is we, uh, we have particular focus on those 60 or 70 critical
systems in terms of the, um, certification accreditation, those making sure
security and privacy settings are robust.
We've still got work to do in that space so they're not, um, fully all,
um, certified and accredited and we've got remediations even on those critical
ones. Um, but we've continued to improve year on year.
We're seeing, um, improved, um, assurance around all of those
critical systems.
And just one final one, just around procurement. Well, two parts to it.
Yeah, one, are you looking at an end-to-end contract management system or
do you think that this AI technology you're kind of putting over the top is going
to be enough? And again, just, yeah, what kind of, um,
insights is that giving you and how are you acting on them, I suppose?
Yeah, um, this is probably two parts.
So in terms of our, um, you know, we would like to get all of our systems
too. We'd love to have a contract management system.
We'd love to move to full procure-to-pay, um, process and, and
system integration of that. Um, but that has to be prioritised against everything
else that we're doing in the ministry, all of the, um, other technology challenges
that we have. And actually, we're, we're reasonably comfortable at this stage that
while we'd like to do those things, that actually the things we are focused on are
things like how we manage our, our legal aid debt, um, obviously the Te Ureka
program, that those need to be the priorities and that we've got the priorities
right. Um, and so what our focus has been on is the absence of kind of those,
like, I guess, best pr- best practice systems in that, um, commercial space,
procurement space, is making sure that we're putting in the processes that enable
us to be assured that even without a contract management system, w- we're,
we're okay and we've got the right checks and balances in place.
Um, and so, um, in that I gave one example-
Mm-hmm.
... of how we're using AI. There's actually a number of ways in which we're using
AI, even through, um, some of our procurement process, our contract management
process.
Um, and so that is, that is giving us, um...
What the AI is doing effectively is it's doing a lot of the manual work-
Yes.
... and so our procurement team are actually able to spend more time on the
value-adding activities, which is if the AI can do that, that manual stuff
around what actually is the most up-to-date version of contract, then they, they're
using that to then, um, add value in terms of, "Well, what's the contract saying?
How do we work with the supplier?" And that sort of thing.
Thank you.
Okay, now we're meant to be moving to just outcomes for Māori,
but, um, Dr. Sunan, you had a question?
Just, just outcomes for Māori?
You've got those ****** out.
Oh.
We have a str-
New agenda. ... new agenda. Okay. Uh, no, I'm, I'm
okay. I
had some- Do you want to talk about the order?
Okay. No, no, we don't want-
Do you want to talk about the order?
No, no, no. We'll go with this order. Thank you.
All right. So-
I have questions later, then.
Okay. Who's up for a question?
I can certainly ask a question.
Right, Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
I'm just actually, uh, interested in a really, um,
global question, which I, I've always kind of struggled to
understand. Because
you've got a number of programs in place across the
organization which seek to address issues with Māori and the
justice system, um, but I'm not quite sure
how we know when we've, when we are
succeeding, um, and certainly when we have
succeeded. Um, so can you just talk about
what measures would be in place to
say, "We are on track." And I know it's
aspirational, but how would we know when we've arrived?
Well, look, that's a, I think, a really good question
because it, it helps us locate back in the statement of intent, back in the
outcomes that we've got and where our purpose
sits. So, our, our purpose statement says we
want to en- en- strengthen people's trust in the, in the
law. Uh, we monitor and we've put into
the, uh, crime and victim survey now questions that specifically address
what is the levels of trust in the law.
And we can break that down by different groups, including by Māori, uh,
and others. So we can... and we know that there's a gap there, that Māori
levels of trust in the justice system are lower than, uh,
non-Māori. So there's a metric that we can manage there.
We, we have six priority areas, you know, that we have set for
ourselves. One of them is reducing disproportionality of
Māori, uh, in the, in the, in the court system and we've
particularly decided to, to track that at the-
... at the, uh, number of Māori, uh, appearing,
uh, who are coming into court.
Yes.
Uh, and I think-
Coming for the first time, do you mean?
Beg your pardon?
Coming to court for the first time?
Oh, no, no, not for the first time.
Just generally?
However often they come to court, 'cause actually that's helpful because it
picks up, uh, where there is, uh, re-offending,
uh, and the like, which I think is also part of the dynamic here and part of what
you need to solve to get on top of, of some of these issues.
So, I think those numbers, um, uh, you know, we know that for the
general, uh, population of, of Māoris about 17 or 18%,
I think, uh, the offending levels or first appearance in court
is, uh, 41%, uh, for Māori.
So, so we, we can and do, and are quite active in tracking
some of those things there.
And the other one that you haven't mentioned, which you might want to come back to,
is victim, Māori victims, right?
Absolutely, yeah.
Um, do, and are those numbers
tracking positively or are they s- uh, my understanding was
they're pretty static.
They are pretty static in the, in the court space.
Some of the numbers are, the absolute numbers are coming down, but,
but, but because numbers of category two cases coming into the courts are
going down, that trend is actually what's happening.
Uh, the work, there's a, there's a story in here about the workload of the court.
There are more category three cases coming in, which is a lot more intense.
Overall numbers of people coming into court are just dropping slightly and that's
because the category two numbers are going down.
Māori is going down, but so, so are the rest.
And you're right, that we're not making any particular ground on the
question of disproportionality.
Mm-hmm. So, how are you responding to the fact that you're not making progress?
Well, so we have a range of, of, of, of projects in the space to be,
uh, measuring is really important and, and keeping it to the forefront.
Uh, there are a number of particular programs, some of them which are not
just oriented at Māori-
I think, I, I, you know, I've had a look at the programs, and, and you're right,
there's plenty in, in strategies and so on, but most of them
appear to have been in place for quite some time.
Um, I, I can't, and you might be able to inform me, I can't see any
new programs or programs which are taking a new
approach. And given that we've got a static situation, the
question is what are we doing differently that's going to move the needle in the
right direction?
Well, uh, the first comment I'd make on that is, you know, what we see in our court
system is the back end of a big system
of, of often disadvantage, uh, and the like.
So, we're always gonna be a bit of a receiver.
There are levers that we can pull in the court system and in the justice system-
Funnily enough, corrections said exactly the same thing.
Well, they're even further down the line,
Well, I know, but you see the point, right?
That if we had, we have a justice cluster for a reason, but anyway ...
No, no, but I, well, I, I would put all of us in the justice cluster and I mean, I,
I think there's absolutely leaders and I'll talk about a few other things that
we're working on there. But we're also a product of broader
socioeconomic, of there's things happening in the benefit system or the education
system, or, or other sorts of things.
So, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not in any way
absolving us from the responsibility to tackle this.
I'm just saying, to some extent, you know, what, you know, I wouldn't set a
very specific target for us in some of these numbers for Māori because there are so
many things well beyond our control.
I track it and keep asking the question, whether we're doing enough.
To answer your question about whether, uh, whether we are
doing things that are new and that we can see a change
on, the, to measure these sorts of outcomes takes quite a long time.
So, there's actually, over the last three or four years, there has been a lot of
new activity in this space. There's the Young Adults List Courts,
there is Te Omarama, which is, neither of these are just oriented towards Māori,
but because there are a lot of Māori in the population and they're in, in
the courts, they have a big part of the impact there.
But Te Omarama is about making the court experience, it's more likely to
bring a therapeutic angle, it's more likely to offer solutions.
The Young Adults List Courts are about recognizing the needs of individuals.
We've, we're running a, a couple of programs, uh-
So, as your response, 'cause I, I, you know, I've read the documents and you've got
a number of other proj- uh, programs as well.
Are, are you essentially saying these programs are long-term programs, and it's
simply too early to tell?
On some of those we have some indications, but, um, and
I'm, um, Becs might want to come up and, and talk about some of this,
uh, but if you're talking about re-offending, you know, you're, you're talking
re-offending in one year, re-offending in two years.
If, by the time you launch something, you're, you're immediately in sort of three
years before you're really gonna have a clear sense of whether something like
that's happened. So, so-
But the, the danger is we get into a ten-year change cycle, right?
Something not working has been in place for 10 years before you revisit it.
It's not very nimble.
Well, I think there's a question of being nimble-
So-
... and there's a question of just how long some things take.
Yeah, okay, so... Mm-hmm.
I'm gonna-
Okay. I'm sorry, you go. Sorry.
And you're after. Hi, I was just gonna, uh, speak to, speak to Leonid's question-
Yeah.
... a little bit. Um, so we have been doing this year a, a number of
outcomes reviews, uh, looking at particular therapeutic courts, um,
to understand what some of the outcomes related to
sentencing, re-offending, timeliness, et cetera.
Um, that's still, uh, you know, we're in a relatively infant
space, but we've been, um, able to see particularly s- for the Rangitahi
courts, uh, that those, uh, Rangitahi that go through those
courts, 75% of them will complete their family group
plan and be, um, discharged without
conviction. Um, and that's in comparison to those that go through the normal youth
court at, at a rate of 60%. So, in terms of reducing disproportionality
and of conviction, uh, we are seeing some success in that
space. In terms of Te Omarama, it's really only been rolled out,
uh, in a full implementation state at the moment, but we've put a lot of
effort into establishing the base measures and also setting up ways
that we can track and monitor progress ahead of being able to give you
a very clear, uh, understanding of the longer term impacts of that.
And so there's both a monitoring framework and an evaluation framework that sits
behind that. But in reality, uh, when someone goes through the court
system...That in itself takes some time, especially if you're
taking a therapeutic approach. Then they will have to have at least
18 months out the other side before we'd even be able to start to look at the, sort
of re-offending rates. So for a lot-
I
support that. ... of this stuff it's very-
We've got a couple of subs. Right. So, um, Ms.
Wolgers and then I'm going to Rima and then I'm going to new um-
One- one second.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.- Mine's also kind of
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you Secretary and to your staff-
Oh,
hey, Alan. ... across the country. Um, I suppose there's an attached question of whether the
performance measures themselves are sufficient.
So I note that in relation to-
Mm-hmm.
... legal aid for example, the performance measure appears to be the number
of legal aid cases that are granted, or cases that are granted legal
aid, as opposed to looking at quality, resolution,
um, and response. And so is there an effort to look at the
measures themselves and whether there ought to be additional measures?
We, we have a huge number of measures that we track and that we look at across all
parts of our business. And, and we're forever
pressurizing Bex and her team to take some new, new
takes on the material so we can understand it, uh, better.
In legal aid there's a lot of different things that go on there.
We, we have measurements I think Carl may want to m- come up and speak to this, but
we would, we have, we have measures around, uh, um,
that, that go to the, you know and processing of approvals, to
the, uh, the, the payments, the, the numbers of, of, of
re-applications and the like. It's, they don't specifically go
to the quality of the legal advice
'cause that's a, that's, that's a, it's a different bit of a ballpark
than we're really able to do, uh, much about.
But, but I, I think in terms of the measures, we're always looking at how
we can, um, sharpen up our measures and, and stay on top of things.
Yeah. We've got legal aid coming up at 2:50.
Um, I want to go back to Rima. We were just talking about Māori th- um-
Yeah.
Sorry?
I just want to confirm it... Hello. Thank you for coming in again.
Um, I just want to confirm that Māori victimization as mentioned in
the, um, report on page 25 has gone down from
39% in 2018 to 34%
in 2024. Yep, still slow but it's-
Yeah.
... yeah, it's trending down-
... um, which is a positive.
It is.
Yeah. Just confirming that.
It is. Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
No. Thank you, thank you for, um, noting that. Yeah.
Okay. Uh, I'm coming back to Honorable Ginny Anderson.
Well, thank you very much. Um,
I, I was looking at some data recently that showed an increase, um,
of, particularly around prosecutions for personal use of
cannabis, uh, was really dis- had gone up
over, over the past sort of 12, 18 months.
And, and that Māori were really disproportionately
affected, um, in, in those
statistics. A- and it was qui- a, a bit of a jump from what we'd seen in the
past. I, I'm, I'm really interested to understand from a
justice perspective
why you see an increase in those, those prosecutions in that particular
area. A- and furthermore, whether you think there's any
systemic bias that's causing, um, Māori to be
disproportionately represented?
I, I, I think that's a, that's a really interesting question and I've, and my
answer will be one of, um, uh,
examining possibilities 'cause I don't think we, we fully understand the reasons
behind that. But the, in some of the changes that have come through in, in
recent legislation there has been an extension of the ability for
searches, certainly the gang patches in- increased the number of searches and there
are, I think there are other instances where the, the police have more search
powers than they did. I mean one, and it's a
hypothesis rather than something I can, um, put my hand on
heart and say, is that it's, it's quite likely that because there are more
searches happening now, there will likely be more drugs found
and that has seen an increase in the possession charges for both cannabis
and methamphetamine.
Mm-hmm. Do, do, do you have a view like that, that has been systemically
one that has been, uh, disproportionately represented by Māori.
One of the, for Māori, one of the views
is, is that, um, if there's another crime that's potentially
been committed and a person is suspected of committing that
crime,
they're turned over and found a small amount of cannabis and held
on that basis until further work is done to understand whether the
secondary offenses are able to be prosecuted or not.
So cannabis can be used as a, as a purpose of holding somebody for
further investigation. Are you aware of that practice
occurring?
I, I'm, I'm, I'm not aware of that practice. You'd have to ask police about that.
I wouldn't be able to offer any insight on that one.
But the change to the Misuse of Drugs Act that was I think in
2019, it actually asked for there to be a presumption
of a personal use for a referral to a health or a treatment service as
opposed to prosecution.
Why do you think we've moved away from a health based response for
personal users of, of low levels of cannabis?
A- again, you're really talking about decisions that often police will be making
and you'd have to address that question to police.
I, I don't, I, I don't have a perspective to offer on that one.
But a- a- as a cluster, with, with, with a focus
on reducing disproportionate representation of Māori within our
justice system, do you not have an eye over some areas that are changing
and-
We, we absolutely-
... can
ask those questions? ... could get to that question. That's, it's not, it's, it's, uh, to be honest some
of this, the, the, the impact, uh, or the increase in the
number of drugs charges is, is, uh, uh,
I've, it's become part of the conversations I'm having only quite recently.
But I think some of the work we're doing would absolutely ask the question
about what's driving that. And if we understand what's driving that, uh, that
would lead to a justice sector conversation.
But we haven't had that sort of conversation at this point.
And, and you have no kind of theory or view as to...
You, you just think it might be the, the changes to some of the gang stuff?
Uh-
But that was only a short time ago. That's quite a short...
But, well, true but that's, that's, that's-
Nine
months. I'd, I'd, I'd want to test that harder and it's a, it's a worthwhile, uh, piece of
work to do.
Okay. You've got something?
Yes, uh, just a few questions on, um, some of the stuff that you already
mentioned. I think the first one is around Te Ao Mārama.
And, um, we know that Te Ao Mārama has been paused in terms of some of the
additional ones, well, the current ones after review.
Um, but you also mentioned that some of that would take a long time review.
When do we expect there to be a result on the evaluation Te Ao
Mārama, and that way there is then a confidence from you to
say to the minister that, "This is a good program, we should continue funding
it."
Well, w- we're doing... I- I'll get Beck's comment a little bit further.
We are already doing, uh... the evaluation is underway, but it's quite
early days. And, uh, uh, clear we haven't stopped with Te Ao Mārama.
We... th- we are working through the eight sites on-
But the new ones have been-
The new ones?
Yeah.
Uh, you know, there's a... ministers have made it clear that we need-
Yep.
... to go back with a, with a, with a proper evaluation-
... uh, and then have a judgment, uh, made.
But we will start to get some indications next year, but it will actually,
to fully understand it, will be between now and probably the next three or four
years.
So, are we saying that there won't be any new, except the
existing eight, there won't be any new, um, potentially happening 'cause you
won't finish your evaluation until-
No, I don't think that necessarily follows.
I th- I think at, at the moment it's, we're not in a position at this
point.
Okay.
I'm not making a, uh, uh, a proposal at this point to try and-
... get an increase, but in the... you know, by the time we've seen the early
results in '26, if we're really confident and then that may mean that there's an
opportunity in the '27 budget, for example.
So, I don't think we have to wait till the end.
Okay.
But the evaluation will, uh, take place over several years.
Good to know. Just, uh, the second line of question, it's around what, uh, Duncan
was mentioning-
It's actually your third, but... (laughs)
Oh, yes. Uh-
Ooh.
Quite a few. I've got quite a few. Th- in terms of what Duncan's mentioning that
one of the key targets, and this is what we're hearing from OPCAT as well, is
around reduction of
Māori in the justice system, not just in terms of the early answer, but also in
terms of remand and also in terms of the court system.
Has that number changed or varied?
'Cause I can't actually see a re-
Let's see if
we can- ... response on that.
I think, um,
what we, uh...
So,
I can speak to that. So, um, yes, we do track all of those, the disproportionality
at all stages through the process.
And in terms of remand-
Mm-hmm.
... um, there has been a, a decrease in the number of people on
remand at the moment, and the remand rate overall has decreased.
And the proportion of Māori?
Um, the proportion of Māori on remand, I'm just, let me get my-
Has that increased or decreased?
I think it's increased from
Oh.
Well, let me look at that.
Yeah, sorry. (laughs)
Uh, so... oh, go ahead.
Oh, the number. Um, so
in terms of the proportion, uh, on remand, um, is
about... it was about 55. Uh,
because the number overall has come down in remand in comparison
to the f- the sentence for both non-Māori and Māori-
Mm-hmm.
... it has reduced slightly in the last few months.
So, but then someone just said that the percentage has increased, the proportion-
I think the proportion has hit 1%. If,
um...
The n- the number...
The overall number will have gone down, but the pro- if, but the overall number of
remand has gone down. But the proportion-
So, so the total number on-
Oh no, it's both the
same. The proportion on remand-
Ah, okay.
... and, was 43% a year ago, is now 40%.
Mm-hmm.
I don't have the number specifically-
Okay.
... for Māori at the moment, but-
Great. And just, uh, on term- in terms of the data, um, the data
that Rima quoted, um, around 34% and there's a
decrease in terms of victims who are Māori that which is really good to see.
But do you do any sort of, um, any granular investigation
on that number? On how many of that, for example, any changes
to victims who were also previously have been in
remand or have been convicted?
I don't think we do that particular connection.
We do some granularity there. We look at various intersectional
issues, but, um, I don't think we-
No. So, so the information about victims of, uh, comes
from the New Zealand Crime and Victims Survey.
And so, it's, uh, a whole, um, sample survey that looks at the
population. But w- why, why we've seen that proportion come down is
largely driven by a reducing number of burglaries that have been
occurring.
'Cause the reason I'm asking that particular question is I also wanted to know in
terms of if you want to address some of the, I get the vicious cycle
within what we're seeing, particularly when it comes to Māori justice, that it
would be good to know if, you know, how many of the victims are perpetrators and
perpetrator are victim and some of that
Okay. Well, why don't we, why don't we ask-
That'd be good.
Why don't we try and do it on the-
Can- I, I, I think if, if I'd answer that question actually in the broader context
of social investment, because what y- what we are doing and
including with the Social Investment Agency is understanding the various drivers
of, um, of behavior. So, one of the target populations that the Social
Investment Agency is working on now, which they've announced is
for children who have a parent, uh, in custody.
Yep.
So that is enabling... that's because of the, uh, basically using
the IDI, you can see a number of those connections and using that
strong evidence base to work out where interventions might
Okay. And final question on-
That's fine.
Okay. Uh,
one of the
acs, you know, the... we can talk about this later as well when it comes to, you
know, access to justice. But one of the things we're seeing is now
Section 27 report is no longer being under-funded through legal
aid. And, um, but yet we also know that, you know, Māori
are more, are, you know, a- do access legal aid and et cetera.
How has that affect the cost to the
system in terms of, um, access
to... well, I guess access just, but particularly around Section 27
report and what can be used in term, as a substitute?
And also in terms of how that led to maybe court
delays?
Uh, I, we don't think it is... uh, we, I don't think we have evidence that it's led
to court delays. It, it's obviously, it was running, I think in the
order of $7 million-
Yes.
... uh, beforehand, and, and clearly that legal aid cost has gone down.
There has been an increase in some of the costs of reports, other
sorts of reports, uh, that are being, uh, generated.
And I thi-... I don't have the numbers, but it's, it's kind of 1 to 2 million
increase that we've seen-
Okay.
... elsewhere. Uh, Corrections is doing, uh, more work in
relation to their PAG report. So, the system is, is adapting
to, to make sure that the information that the court needs,
uh, before them can be gathered in, in other ways.
Right. We've got a supplementary from, um, Steve.
Yeah. And this kind of picks up-
Mm-hmm.
'cause I think what we're seeing here is actually, um, maybe there's more
information we need. And I'm, again, I'm referring back to the audit letter here,
um, and it actually says, uh, in one of the comments that, "Some of the
key, um, outcome reporting areas, um, needs more
comprehensive and meaningful reporting." And they actually use Justice
Outcomes for Māori as one. Yeah, have you given...
And again, if I look at your annual report, there's a, there's a
little bit, but there's not, not that much.
Have you given more thought to, yeah, what you could actually be trying to
demonstrate how you're delivering this key outcome-
We, we have.
... out here?
Uh, my, my colleague, uh, Victoria Davy did talk to this, uh, as well.
What I would say, uh, at a (coughs) at
a... It's, it's a very big topic.
Yes.
Uh, w- y- in order to get traction on it and to get deeper
understanding, uh, we are
trying to focus down on the areas where disproportionality is
greatest. And so, we are taking forward a particular work
program, uh, on, uh, Māori women, Wahine Māori,
and young Māori, Rangatahi Māori.
And that is very much based on where we see the greatest need.
So, if you-
Mm-hmm.
... if you look at people entering the courts, uh,
whilst, uh, Māori enter the courts at 42% compared
with the population level of about 17%, uh, Wahine
Māori is at 49% and Rangatahi Māori
is at 56%.
So, um, Victoria, I don't know if you wanted to talk any more about that-
Mm-hmm. ... work program.
Happy to. Um, so as part of the work, uh, analysis that the Sector
Insights Team had done into the '24, '25 year, they were starting to look
at disproportionality. So, it is actually a shift for us, um, from our previous
measure, which was looking more broadly at improving outcomes for Māori.
And we've... uh, the analysis that we've undertaken helps us to really focus in
on areas of investment. So, looking at disproportionality through the
system as people track through the system, uh, is the beginning of
us developing, uh, measures to focus in on,
on areas for investment, further investigation and
investment. Um, two of the cohorts that we've identified through
that work is Wahine Māori and Rangatahi Māori.
We know that for them disproportionality is most acute, and so the work that we're
undertaking at the moment is to further understand that.
It aligns really well from a sector perspective as well, uh, for
Corrections, um, and Police, where we are aligning up our efforts to
identify what are some of the challenges that are happening in the system, in the
justice system, and how we might be able to meaningfully, uh,
invest and investigate, a- analyze what's going on there.
Um, and it's not... Sorry, not just with our justice sector partners, it's also
with the judiciary. So, we all play a role, uh, in piecing together this picture in
understanding disproportionality. So, I think we are on that journey.
Um, the refresh of our strategy this year and the focus, the pri-, the new
priority goal, um, is a testament to that increased focus.
And I anticipate that over the coming year, the work that we will continue to do
will help us to more meaningfully target initiatives in priority
areas.
So, we should expect to see that in the next... maybe in the next annual report?
Mm-hmm.
That's question one. And then two, and I'm, I'm assuming but just let's get it on
the record, are you then also, as you're doing this work and thinking about the
measures, working with the Office of the Auditor-General to kind of test that and
make sure that is the kind of level of detail that they think would be-
Yes.
... required?
Yes. Yeah. Uh, yes. Yeah, um, our team that puts together-
Yeah.
... the statement of intent has been working on that.
Good.
Yeah.
Just, just to get that on the record.
And we, we meet, we meet with them... I meet with them quarterly, I
Yeah. Well, you'll
be- It'll be on the rack next year.
Good. Just-
Right. Now, let's be radical and turn it ti-...
start talking about digital case management.
Oh.
(laughs)
Dr. Sun Naan.
Thank you. Um, I will start us off, uh,
with some numbers, which is my favorite game.
(laughs)
Um, so
in the 2024 to 2025 appropriation that we saw in the
budget in Vote Court, the allocation to, uh, Te
Areka was $2.8 million. In appendix three, after
we got back of appro-... of, uh, contracts that are,
uh, not... that did not, though, go through a competitive procurement
process-
(coughs)
... the software licensing for Te Areka program is $11
million. There is nothing in the supplementary budget for 2024 to
2025 as well for Te Areka.
Why is there... It... What is the reason behind that significant blowout from
$2.8 million to $11 million?
So, ... describe as that, but I will ask Andy to probably describe around the-
Yeah, I, I was very disappointed that he didn't get a question.
(laughs)
Yeah. So-
Come on up.
I feel
like- You sat up there and not one person threw a numbers question at you.
So- It's
outrageous. I feel like a counting session one for you.
We should make him sit there for the rest of
That's right.
Yeah. Politicians not very good with numbers.
Sorry.
Can we get a... Just start that again.
So-
(laughs)
... in Vote Court 2024-2025-
Yeah.
... uh, the allocation to Te Areka that I can
see is $2.888 million.
In 2023-2024 it was 4.5. You know, so potentially
the $11 million that we see here in appendix three could
be cumulative. I don't know. Maybe is
helpful. But this specifically says 2024 to
2025 in terms of procure, non-competitive procure,
procurement.I'm also double-check the supplementary budget for
2024-2025 and there's nothing in there for Tauraka.
Okay. Well, hopefully you can get that question-
Can you see why-
... did you know-
... from 2.888 to 11 point-
So, during, during the, during the '24-'25 year, we would have
received some initial money, seed money, to, to do Tauraka which would have just
been the planning.
Yeah.
We went to, um, government in February
this year, in March this year, and drew down operational money
for implementation and some out-years cost of licenses
for the first phase that we're working on, which is the family courts.
Um, so, so, you will see in the, in, in those increases, you will see
those dollars that we've been, been given.
Now, some of that money is obviously for implementation, and then in some of that
money also will be starting the licenses.
We've had to
take on that, you know, the Microsoft licenses and things like that, and we've got
that. We've signed those contracts for a long period of time.
So, what you're saying here is the software licenses for Tauraka program, the
$11 million, is for both the licensing and implementation of
the tool.
If that says licenses-
Basically,
... then that would just be for the licenses.
So, $11 million just for the licenses.
It doesn't cover-
But that will, that will, that will be over a period.
But we've drawn down.
Oh, okay.
So, we have drawn down... So that will be a, a long-term, longer term of license.
How long is this license stand for, the $11 million?
Uh, well, I believe we've signed up licensing-
For five-
... about seven years?
Five years.
Yeah.
I might-
But I haven't got the details of that, the exact details of that conversation.
Would you be able to provide us with some details?
We sure can, yeah.
Thank you.
I think it's, yeah.
Okay. Are you done?
Thank you. Um-
And very well done.
(laughs)
(laughs) Now we're on to Tony.
Away from the numbers, um, off to colors
now.
(laughs)
So, your honor, you got a red rating, uh-
Phonics. We're on to phonics.
... in terms of, uh, its delivery. And
I've had a look at some documents including a m- briefing to the minister of
25 September. Um,
I guess one thing I'm just interested in is really quick question, is you've had
a Treasury Gateway Review. Mm-hmm.
Um, which says you might
deliver, um, I think uses the word probable.
Um, can we see a copy of that? I know that, um...
Yep. Good. Okay.
I will note that.
Um-
All right. (laughs)
The other thing is you-
(laughs)
There's a whole lot of steps in place and I'm glad to see that you've got more than
one critical friend up there-
(laughs)
... with the other one.
What's the critical friend system you've got going on?
Okay. So, we have a independent advisor who sits in our governance
group. Uh, he is actually leading very similar
program over in the Victorian justice system, so in the courts
there. They are actually ahead of us, um, in their programs.
They've done their first phase; they're in the middle of their second phase.
So, he, um, provides us both advice on the committee and
also, um, insights from their own program.
And as we were unpacking our go s- what's called a Go To Green Plan,
so taking a program from red back into that green status, uh,
we ran sessions with him where he got to see what
our approaches were and our plans were, and he virtually interrogated them.
So, who, who's, who's your independent advisor?
So, it's a man called Adam Tom Hutter from...
So, he's from the Victorian Courts.
Oh, he's from the-
Yeah.
...
Victorian Courts. So, he's actually leading... He's my counterpart over, over there.
Oh, okay. And, um, is this the steering committee?
Is this the-
Yeah. He sta- He's part of our governance group.
We, we also have, uh, Colin McDonald as the independent chair of that steering
committee as
Colin McDonald's the independent chair?
Okay.
Was.
Um-
Is.
Yes. Now, you've got a technical quality assurance program-
Mm-hmm.
... underway and anoth- and another one I'll come to.
Is the technical quality assurance done?
Yes.
And what's the outcome of that?
So, it was positive. It's, uh, had, uh, positive findings about the quality of the
build. So, that looks at virtually the underlying infrastructure
and how the solution is being built, and it was very positive about it.
We also had an independent review of the underlying code done
by Microsoft.
I see.
And that also spoke positively about the quality of the
build.
So, so far, we've got no problems, which is great.
(laughs)
(laughs) Which one w-... So, the other process
is, I think, an, an independent quality assurance review-
Yeah.
... IQA review. I- Has that been completed?
Yes. So, that has also been completed.
And what's the process? What's the outcome of that?
So, that one is also... So, so that looks at the program, the whole program
infrastructure.
And that has said, uh, yes, the program
has, as you stated, has been in red, and the sort of right actions are
now in place to start to bring the program back into green.
It recognized though that the complexity of a program of this
nature, um, is not unusual for this type of transformation and the
types of issues that we've been working through.
It also acknowledged the quality of the build, but that this is more
complex than we originally in- thought, and that is what's driving
our scheduled risk.
So, the sort of red-orange problem is simply this is
really-
Complex.
... complicated.
Yeah.
I don't know. I might put a, a take across it.
'Cause it's, it's quite unusual, right? That...
'Cause we knew it was going to be complicated.
(laughs)
It'd be-
Yeah.
We knew it was going to be compila- Uh, the IQA experts that did it, uh, were
very clear that projects of this always find complexities that you didn't
necessarily identify at the beginning. My summary of the IQA...
So, we've had a lot of critical friends.
I mean, you've, you've, you've gone-
(laughs)
... gone through them.
You're
And I would add ministers and others-
(laughs)
... uh, to that and the GCDO, uh, and so we've been very open
with, uh, other agencies. But the, the summary, I think, of where we are
now is we're coming towards the end of the build of the first phase in
the family court. Uh, we had hoped that that would be concluding by
Christmas. It will now-
Yeah. ... be early in the new year that we conclude that build.
That then has some flow-on impacts in terms-
Yeah.
... of the testing and the training.
The IQA has said, "Your technology is really sound."
Uh, the exper- We've run some tests with, uh, court staff, with members of
profession, judiciary, and they are finding the technology really
in- intuitively good. So, there's ev- Every time we do some testing, we're getting
a-
... a, a really positive and excited response.
But the IQA, and, and this is something not just for Victoria but for my whole
leadership team, is recognizing that this is such a big
change, that all of what Karl's people do, all of what Kelvin's people
do, uh-
(coughs)
... right across the organization, even Bex here who has to rely on the, the
numbers for reporting, for us to keep the system
moving, all of those things have got to be integrated together in the
implementation. And we, we have to do more work
to make sure that we're getting that integration bit right.
So, that's the bit that we're-
So-
... that we're-
... excuse me, so- ... is really focusing on in the go-to-green.
I heard that technically it seems to be okay.
You know, if you have a Microsoft view and
you (coughs)
So, is it really the amount of data you're wanting
to effectively draw out of it?
Uh-huh.
And are you s- Or, is another problem the human
interface, the uptake by members of the
profession? And I see, so I did go on your little website and had a play.
Yeah (laughs) .
Uh, the, um, the public, right, and
also, uh, the judiciary. Uh, is that, is there risks there?
It's, it's, uh, uh, the point is, is less about any one of those and more about
all of them together.
Yeah.
Because I think in each of those areas, uh, we see issues and we're working
them through. The judicial interface is a really important one, because this
will really drive behaviors when the judiciary are using it, so we're
working with the judiciary about making sure that we, we meet their needs.
That public interface is important, but so are all the interfaces-
(coughs) ... within the ministry. So, the issue is not th- there's complexity in all of
those areas. The challenge that we're really gripping up as
a, as a whole leadership team is about how we actually, uh,
do we, we move it all together in an integrated way, recognizing that we'll
actually have to run two systems for quite a long time, because we have files that
are on the old CMS system as well as files that are on the new system.
And lastly, in terms of costs, it's clear from the documentation that costs are
increasing. Um, I'd be interested to know if, it, it
appears you think at the moment we can do that-
Hm.
... out of baseline or existing funding.
Um,
to, to what degree are costs increasing?
Have we got a 25% uplift or-
No. So, uh, that is reference, well,
referencing the detailed business case, so that was prior to
procurement. So, since, um,
from that business case to now, the cost has gone up 15%.
So, once we've gone to market, um, we found out that yes, the solution from a whole
of life perspective, so not just, not a program perspective-
Yeah.
... but the whole, has gone up 15%. But of that 15%,
80% is actually related to financial
contingency, so not until they-
So, just to be clear, you've gone to market and got a price.
You haven't had an increase in price from contract price?
Uh, it's not about that. It's about it was much more higher than we
thought. Uh, there are increased costs in various
areas, but it's 15%-
Is it a fi-
... from the detail.
Is it a fixed price for delivery, or is it-
It's a mix.
It's a mix?
Yeah. And we
have always said we will come back after every time we do our scope, what's called
scope and define phase, so we've done all the detailed design.
Yeah.
We then go into a fixed price at that point.
Uh-
And you're not getting scared off by those-
No.
... fixed prices? Okay.
I, I, I would actually just, uh, pay credit to Vic- Victoria here.
I think she runs a really tight ship, uh, and so that whilst we've got
some delay that we've talked about, uh, at the moment, we
are, we are tracking the finances in a way that is, is, is still-
All right. I'm gonna take a step over here, and then we're gonna move to Victor
next.
Oh, just, well, I mean, you touched on it now, but let's just-
Mm-hmm.
... um, be clear. What, yeah, what is the latest timeline now for the rollout of
the different phases as of today? You know.
As of today?
Yeah.
As of today, we would, we, we are s-
(laughs)
... we would (laughs) , the latest timeline is-
Yeah.
... we will tell you in March.
(laughs)
Right (laughs) . That's okay.
Um, because, uh, but, but we would ex- I, I, you know, I mean, we would expect it,
it, it's, it's months.
Right.
It's a few months. The, uh, the original intent was that we would start the
implementation in July next year.
It will be some months later than that.
Exactly how many months-
Right.
... I, I have a view, but I'd get a kick from Victoria if I, if I committed
to that-
Come on. ... 'cause we're still working it through, right?
No (laughs) .
(laughs)
But it will be, it'll, it'll be some months.
Not just Victoria?
And, yeah (laughs) .
I mean, as per the annual report, will it still be staged in this same way?
It will be, yeah. Yeah, yeah.
It's just that the timelines got the-
Yeah.
Yeah, it's-
Look, overall, uh, I'm, you know, it's, we-
we're keeping the pressure on on the timelines. This is a really important thing.
It actually will feed into a whole lot of the other changes that we're needing to
make-
Mm-hmm.
... in the court system. So, there's a huge amount of impatience to get it in
place, but there's a huge commitment to making sure we get it right.
Yeah.
And that means if it takes a little bit longer, it takes a little bit longer, but
we're managing the finances well.
Yes.
And, and maybe just, can you just, one last one if you indulge me as the chair.
(laughs)
Just 'cause you did touch on it, but I, I think it's worth elaborating-
Yeah.
... a little bit more. Obviously, you've been testing some of this with the
stakeholders-
Mm-hmm.
... and we've got, uh, the legal profession, it may be Dr.
Webb is gonna be needing to use this system-
Yeah, that's right (laughs)
. ... in the not too distant future, so that's why I was asking.
(laughs)
But you've also all got judiciary courts starting
briefly, but I wanna, yeah, wanna understand, what has-
(laughs)
... their experience been, um, using the system and, and what
refinements have you made, actually-
Okay.
... with them testing?
Yeah, so we have been doing what's called mini end-to-end testing,
and that has actually been taking the product as it's been
built out into our registries. Um, we did one in Wellington, did,
um, another one in Christchurch, and we're about to take it to Tauranga.
Uh, and that has been tested by people in the
registry alongside our, um, professional testers.
We've had really positive feedback.
There's been tweaks because of that feedback, but actually hasn't come
back with any major issues, which has been really, really good.
Uh, the judges are now demo-ing to other judges the
functionality, um, that's for the judicial decision-making
component, and we take that as really positive that they're comfortable showing it-
Very innovative.
... to each other. Mm-hmm.
Very good. I think we've thrashed this to death now.
(laughs)
We're get- we're moving on to victims.
And I've got first question from Mr. Arbuckle.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um...
There, there.
One, one of the priorities, uh, improving the outcomes for
victims. Uh, you've got the victim assistance
scheme. So I'm wondering, like, what are the measures around that
scheme? And also noting in the government, uh, budget
in 2024, there was $8 million allocated.
Uh, so what, what outcomes have we seen from that?
I'll, I'll get Carl to talk a little bit more on that.
To be honest, the very first priority in, in victims is reducing the number
overall, which does take you back to the government's target for reducing the
victims of violent crime. Uh, you know, the target
initially was to reduce that by 20,000.
Uh, uh, we were at about 185,000,
uh, when we started. It went up initially, uh, which was a cause for
some stress for me and for others, up to over 200,000.
It's now down to about 146,000. So the, the, you know, the
overarching goal here is to reduce, uh, the
numbers of victims in the first place.
If you, if you drop down a level from that, uh, you're in a world
where you're saying, "Can we improve the experience for victims as they make
their way through the justice system?" And we, you know, we
have a l- a lot of information that tells us that, that, that's a pretty
bumpy ride, uh, for victims. That they, they will tell us some of the
problems about having to repeat their story more often, uh, sometimes
about, uh, falling between the gaps, sometimes about being unclear just
what's going on, uh, in the court process, and sometimes not having
the, the financial wherewithal, uh, to, uh, to get in,
uh, to, to even find their way, uh, before the courts and the
like. So I've got beside me, uh, Ryan Orange, uh,
who is the director of the sector directorate, and we're
doing work on victims in the sector space, working through to the justice sector
leadership board, recognizing that, uh,
that it is a whole sector issue. You know, the courts is actually a relatively, you
know, it's a, it's a bit in the middle.
And Carl I might get to talk to it as well.
Carl is the sponsor for the work we do inside the ministry on victims.
But Ryan, would you like to-
Can I do, if I just do
Yeah, sure.
So we got two m- Sorry, it was just the financial question.
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
I'm in some numbers at times.
Yeah, good.
Um, so it was $2 million a year, so what it meant was that 11% more
victims got, uh, financial assistance through the grant program than what
they'd done the previous year. So it's gone from a little over
7,100 victims receiving victims' assistance to
8,000, a little bit over 8,000. Um, so and the victim
assistance scheme is for people to get as, uh, money to help get to
court
and be present in court so they can see the, the trial take place.
So, um, it's been a great thing from a victim's perspective, so that's the
specific initiative you're talking about.
Just so in '24, '25 there was 845
more victims assisted.
That, that equates to 11%.
So are we gonna see that continued through the coming years?
Uh, the, the numbers should hold.
So it should sit about 8,000 rather than drop back to 7,000.
Did you want to say something?
I, I was just gonna talk to the general victims program.
We've got lots of questions coming.
I'll, I'll defer to questions.
Hold your... Right, so I'm going to-
Um- ... go to Duncan as the spokesperson.
Thank you.
Then I'm going to Dr. Sunan.
I'll try to keep it quick. I, I, I want to focus on the work of the
ministerial advisory group for the victims of retail
crime. Um,
I guess and around some of the accountabilities, is, is there, is that
group within its forecast budget? Uh, yes.
Okay. And I guess
is there any concern around the costs that have been incurred by
members of that group?
Uh, no, look, the, the g- the group is, is doing its work.
Uh, you know, they are, um, uh, they're busy and they're
producing quite a lot of advice for ministers.
As part of that, they're running quite a lot of engagements.
Uh, so, you know, we're not, we're not- Oh yeah, is there
any check, um... Or, or what's the audit check
when people put claims in for days worked that the days were
worked? Well, we, uh,
we would take a,
a, a member's
claim for days worked, uh, on, on face value. Right.
It's just, I mean, in terms of the chair, um,
he claimed for, um,
154 days between
February, uh, and July '25, meaning he
worked five days a week and one or two days every weekend, and took
none of the six public holidays in that period.
Does that raise any concern? Look, I,
I, I think this, this is a, a, a pretty passionate undertaking for
the chair, and, and it wouldn't surprise me if he did work very
long days and hours on it. Okay. Um, are, are you
aware of the meeting that was held by the group on 28
February this year in, uh, in, in the
Auckland office? And I'm interested whether any MOJ staff
attended. Uh, I'm... Are you aware of that meeting?
I am aware of it. There was no MOJ staff there, except we have a one person
seconded to work with that retail group who would have
Okay.
And were they able to confirm?
Sorry?
Were they a- able to confirm at, at the meeting?
They weren't there though, did you say?
Sorry, we didn't have any Ministry of Justice staff there.
We had, we had one staff member who was seconded, uh, full-time to work with that
group who would have been there.
Okay.
Yeah.
Um, because the minister attended, but he doesn't appear
to know, because I asked him, how many people attended that
meeting. Do you know? Have you any idea of that?
Uh, um, not that particular meeting, I
think. We'll check. We, we, what we received from the group is actually pretty,
um, wholesome reporting of each of those events that they hold for which there
are costs, uh, what the purpose of the meeting was-
Well, I've a- I've asked...
... how many people were there.
I've asked for all of the documentation on that meeting.
Yeah.
And I, there's, there's no report of that meeting.
There'll be no re- there won't be a report of the meeting, but there'll be,
uh... I mean, it's, um, it's high level-
Don't give him Don't give him anything.
... but there will be a line that will talk about what the purpose of the meeting
was, um, what the costs that were incurred were.
And usually they give us a ballpark estimate of how many people were there.
Well, the, I've asked for those things, and there's no record of names of people
attended-
No, they don't have names.
... or num, or numbers.
All right.
The meeting ran for around two hours and it was held at the offices-
Yep.
... of the group. And there was a lunch which cost around
$3,200. So, for an unknown number of unknown
people. Um, is it a concern, and do you think it's good use of
taxpayers' money, to have a $3,000 lunch for a group where you don't know
who was there?
I, I don't... With a meeting like that, you know, we, we, we've gotta let the
chair and the group do what they do.
You know, we're not micromanaging every decision they make.
Part of what they do is about, um, connecting with community.
So I don't know how many people, I don't know how many people were at that meeting.
Yeah.
Well, th- well, okay, should we be able to know
how many people attended and roughly who they were, even
if it's what groups they represented, when we're spending $3,000 on
lunch?
Well, I, I, I think, uh, I wouldn't expect us
to be doing anything too detailed in terms of invitation lists for
meetings. That's the work of the chair.
Yeah.
We would want to have a, a broad sense of, you know, the, the fact that
this is a legitimate expenditure of, of government money.
Okay, I'm going to Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Chair. We recently had one of the retail crime meetings in
Whanganui.
Mm-hmm.
And I got a email the other day from, uh, one retailer
on the quay.
And I'm interested if the sentiment she shared with me is similar to the sentiment
you're hearing from these meetings across the country.
She said, um, "I was genuinely and pleasantly surprised by the amount of work
happening behind the scenes to support victims of retail
crime, as well as the stronger measures being put in place to hold
offenders accountable. It's encouraging to see that meaningful changes are
underway and that positive progress is being made." Now, the, the, the email goes
on, but is the sentiment you're hearing about the work that
this, uh, advisory group is doing across the country
similar to that?
Uh, look, again, I haven't done any detailed surveying of, of people so
I'm...
Oh, okay.
Uh, I'm, I'm, I'm not able to, uh-
It makes sense,
yeah. ... to reinforce that either on the positive or on the negative side.
But, but what I can say is that the group has been very
active. They've produced a lot of advice.
I know the minister has enjoyed getting that advice.
I think we have had some very, uh, productive and, um,
sometimes robust engagements. Uh, I think that's been a
good thing that has led into, uh, legislation.
Uh, and so there's quite a lot of change that has arisen, uh, from the work
program.
Good to hear.
All right, I'm going to Dr. Sunan for a new question.
Yeah.
Okay.
On victims.
Yep.
Um,
one of the things that has been trialed right now is automatic
numberplate recognition technology.
And the minister made a comment back in October that they have returned
more than 225,000... well,
225,399 has been re- recovered, which is
good. But the minister then also said, "Victims are our priority, and we're
ensuring they receive what they're owed." So, what proportion of that is
returned to the victim, and how much?
Um,
so I, I can't tell you how much of the 226,000.
So I, I can tell you ballpark what happens-
Mm-hmm.
... um, rather than specific to that.
So, uh, whenever we collect a, a fine, uh, money from
somebody, um, it goes paid out by us in the
order of reparations to the victims, and the fine is second.
So, you might think you're paying a $100, um, court fine to us,
but if you owe $100 to a victim, it'll go to the victim who used to owe you the
court fine. That make sense? So the victims are
the, always the first people to receive money-
Yeah.
... if you owe money to the crowd, in our space.
So then, just checking, in terms of one of the OIAs I received back then, why did
the Minister of Justice say that they do not hold this data?
I think the particular term we're asking for a breakdown of the court
fines going to the victim, et cetera.
The Minister of Justice said, "This information is not currently reported on and
would be difficult to link to ANPR activity."
That's, that's right, 'cause I, I have no idea how much of the
$226,000 gets split
across the different categories.
It could go to legal aid, it could go to reparations, or it could go against a
fine, a court fine and/or a parking fine from the Wellington City Council.
So, what advice then have you given to the minister that made the minister so
proudly say that we are returning things to victims?
So I, I, I think the minister's, um, uh, satisfaction with this project is
that more people are repaying debt regardless of to whom it's, it's owed.
I feel like the minister is tying it very closely
to victims. No, no, no, let's have a question. Let's have a question.
Well, victims is part of it.
Yeah.
But I, I, I, I mean, I wouldn't speak for the minister, but I, I find that he's
equally enthusiastic about, uh, fines being paid and, and, and costs to
legal aid de- being repaid also.
Okay, last one-
No,
I-
Oh, sorry.
Sorry, just, so about 25% of every dollar we collect goes out from
reparations, roughly. But I don't know how much of the 200, which
is your question-
I don't know how much of the 226,000 specifically-
No, no, no, but-
Is that something you would look into... Laurence?
No, that would be quite difficult.
No, no, that's all right. Yeah.
Right-o. Let's go, um,
Honorable Janisa. Uh, Anderson's got a couple questions, and then
we'll come to you. Thank you. I, I've just got a couple follow-up ones on the Ministerial Advisory
Group for Retail Crime.
Mm-hmm.
Um,
s- so, we know that the chair invoiced 1,976
hours of work and was remunerated 2,000...
$227,595.
Mm-hmm.
But another member on the board, uh, Carolyn
Young, only invoiced 82 hours......
and was subsequently remunerated, um, just under
$8,000. Do you know, I know you've spoken
too, working hard and that, but that's a substantial difference
between, uh, two members which is-
Mm-hmm. ... we both meet with them, we, we, we, we deal with them, we've seen them, we've
seen them both equally. Um, do you have any understanding why
there's such a substantial difference in hours
being booked and amount being paid, um,
in those, in those, those two roles?
Well, it's essentially the way that, you know, th-this is a small part of,
uh, Caroline's role. She comes to the meeting, she engages with the papers and the
advice and gives, uh, feedback and, uh, for Mr.
Cauchel it's, it's, it's largely what he (coughs)
excuse me,
he's, he's largely a- approaching it as a full-time gig.
And he's working very actively and hard on the, on the matters of it.
So, he's the chair, uh, he's, he's playing a different role than the
other members, uh, of the board. And, and, I think that's perfectly
okay.
Ca- can you see that there could be a public perception of, uh, of
concern given the amount he's charging and the fact he's having a $3,000
lunch?
Well, I, I think, uh, from our point of view, you know,
we, we will assist the invoices as they come in and from the minister's point of
view, he's looking for advice from the group which he's getting, uh, and, and
so I, I think we're, you know, that's, that's an arrangement that's
working.
What other substantial, um, changes that have been made to retail
crime as a result of that investment in that group?
I might get Caroline who's our Dep Sec, uh, Policy to
run through the detail of that-
Thank you.
... but (air whooshes) (group murmurs)
Um, so ministers have made a number of announcements as a result of the advice
they've received from the Retail Mag.
So, there have been announcements, uh, focused on defense of property, particularly
with a retail focus. Um, so there's announcements around,
um, citizen's arrest,
um, uh, defense of property in the retail setting, uh, trespass,
um, theft, particularly low-level retail theft.
Uh, they're the ones that have been announced so far, but the group is still
working on reports to come.
One last question. Um-
Okay, last one, that's fair.
Those, those proposals were all offered to me when I
was the Minister of, of Police and Justice.
And, they were given free of charge.
Can you see why it might be perceived as not a good spend of taxpayer's money for
nearly $300,000 and a $3,000 lunch to be implementing the
same ideas which were presented in a petition to the previous Justice
Committee and given the previous government with no charge?
I think what the, um, what the group has provided ministers
is, uh, specific proposals
with, um, quite a lot of detail on some areas in terms
of both what the legislation could be constructed to look like and the
implementation of it. And having done it with consultation with
stakeholders. So, I think there's, uh, they are, they are quite a lot of reports
that any ministers have found benefit from.
Do you think it's good-
Okay, no,
no. We're now going to, um, Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Kauwite, in your introductory remarks you made reference
to a 70, a 27% decrease
in, uh, cases before, uh, in the awaiting cases before
the District Court. Have I got that correct? Yes. That's backlogs.
I think that was backlogs. Yeah, so a 27% decrease in the backlog- Yes.
before the District Court. Yep. Um,
what does that mean for victims of crime in New Zealand?
Wasn't it?
Well, essentially it means that they're, they're waiting less
long. Uh, we, we had an area where the District Court I think was getting
into, uh, quite a difficult space where people were, were waiting
too long and it, and notwithstanding a lot of different, uh, things that we were
trying to fix there that was continuing to build.
It was exacerbated by COVID. Now, what's happened, uh, over the last
few years is a real focus on bringing, uh, that number down
and clearing first the, the oldest cases.
And then actually a, a general focus on the timeliness standards that the
District Court Judge has put out in his protocols, which is designed to keep the
system moving along. And we're still tracking towards
hitting 90% of that, which we're aiming to get to in 2027, but we're moving
those numbers up slowly, uh, as we go.
So, I think we're now up to 83% of cases go through the District Court,
uh, meeting that standard. Now what that means for victims essentially
is that, that the time that delays them, uh, uh,
that they are in that limbo of waiting for matters to be dealt with is
shorter. They can get on with their lives. It's better for the healing process.
It's, it's better for all of those sorts of things. Fantastic.
And, um, what are some of the changes that have been enacted that have enabled
that 27% decrease? Oh, so there, I mean, I get,
um, uh, there, there's been a huge amount.
Um, I'll get, I'll get Karl to, uh, talk to this, and I, I credit the
leadership that, that he has, has brought.
But not just Karl, I, I think leaders in, in the Police and
Corrections, uh, and there's been a huge amount of judicial leadership, uh, in this
space as well. But, but Karl is the head honcho in the, in the ministry
side, uh, and I'll get him to talk to some of, uh, what
has been done, uh, to improve timeliness, uh, particularly in the, I
think you're particularly talking in the, in the, in the criminal space.
Where your victims are- Yeah, you referenced the 27% dist- in the District Court,
but if there has been a decrease across all of the courts then- I, I mean this,
this committee has had a lot of interest in the coronial space over the years.
Yeah. We made huge change there and the trajectory there is, is really impressive.
So, I'll let, um- Let's go Karl. Yep.
So, notwithstanding there is a section on timeliness, um, so
as far as the District Court, uh, space is concerned, particularly in the criminal
area, we've got a large, large number of initiatives that have been rolling out
over the last 12 or so months. We always start in Auckland, well, we generally
start in Auckland with all of our initiatives.
So, for example, same-day sentencing-
Mm-hmm.
... different ways of the jury lawyers operating.
There's a number of those initiatives, we can give you a big list of what they are
and, and-... and, uh, what they do.
Uh, so we always start in Auckland because that's where about 57% of all criminal
cases actually sit. So we start in Auckland to be part of them,
and then once we get, uh, a tweak and then once we're
satisfied that, uh, they're operating smoothly then we roll them out the rest
of the country. The key thing I would say in this space is that they're not just
Ministry of Justice initiatives or courts initiatives. We are a system.
Whatever, if we're going to do anything with duty lawyers, for example, we need to
talk to the profession regarding what we're doing and how we want to do it.
We need to get their agreement to do some of this stuff.
If we're going to introduce changes to how the prosecution service operates, we've
got to talk to either Crown Law or the Police Prosecution Service to get their
agreement. We obviously have to talk to judges and registry staff as well.
So, an initiative might say, "Well, it's an initiative, you're just implementing it
in a court." We are a system and we have to, um, utilize multiple people- Well,
well- ... from multiple sections to make the improvements.
Yeah, but- And as Andrew said, there is- It's gonna sh- Backlogs have increased
dramatically, and additional criminal space decreased.
Yes, um, dramatically. We think we're about where we want to be
with backlogs, so there's a balance between getting things done in a timely
way and managing your backlog. So we think we've got the balance- We've got to wrap
this up, Sean. ... just about right now in that space. Thank you.
Right, now we're going to go to courts, and members will note that we're
overweight, in inverted commas, with Labour members.
At this point, we're going, uh, Gregory O'Connor is going to join us from
a court spokesperson. We're not going to worry about changing people out, but
Greg, this is your moment.
(laughs)
Um, the court infrastructure-
Pardon the question.
Moving on to that.
We're in five.
I just, I'm going to go to Mr. Bates-
I'll
just follow on from- ... and then I'm going to allow, um, I'll give a question to Mr. O'Connor.
Thank you very much, Chair. Uh, and it's good to be talking about the work
happening on court infrastructure around the country.
I've got two questions. I'm firstly interested in an update
on the major projects that are occurring around the country, including the one in
Whanganui.
Um, first comment I might make before I go to Kelvin on, on this
is, uh, in the, in the courts infrastructure space, there's a
digital element to that, there's a building element to that, uh, in
particular.
Yeah.
Uh, there's actually more activity on across the ministry-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, now than probably there has ever been.
There are a number of projects that started under the last government, and I
acknowledge that, and that have been carried on and continued under the, uh,
current, uh, government. So, there is a big effort going into the
courts space at the moment. But as far as updates, particular reference to
Whanganui-
(laughs)
Um, uh, Kelvin.
Thank you. Um, so we've got, uh, three major new court
builds underway. Uh, so Whanganui, uh, with construction is well underway and
is due to be completed in 2027. Uh, we've got
Tauranga, uh, which is underway, uh, that's due to be completed in
2028. And we've got our Papakura courthouse, uh, which is a mix
of onsite and offsite construction due to be completed in 2027.
Uh, we've also got major redevelopments happening.
Uh, Auckland District Court, uh, has had major redevelopment in terms of
cladding, uh, services, and seismic strengthening.
Uh, that is, that is well underway and in progress.
Uh, we have a number of other seismic, uh, projects, uh, in Hamilton and
Wellington. Uh, and around the country we've, we've got other seismic pieces
that we're dealing to. Uh, and in Manukau, uh, in October, we
recently completed a major redevelopment of that courthouse which has increased
capacity by 30%. Um, so they, they're probably most of the
major projects. Uh, we've got, at any given time, uh, somewhere
around 160 to 200 projects happening across our
court, um, properties, uh, from repaints through to
services upgrades, um, capacity, um, capacity
upgrades, uh, and just general health and safety upgrades as well.
Thank you, uh, for that update. In terms of the seismic
strengthening that you mentioned, has the government's, uh,
changes in seismic strengthening requirements had
any impact on the current projects that you're undertaking
in terms of, um, expectation of cost, um, or
created a change in forecast of future projects that you thought you had
to complete that maybe, uh, you will no longer need to complete to the same
scale?
Yeah, yeah, it has. Uh, so we, um, of the seismic projects that we
have underway, uh, and that we are, are contemplating for the future,
they're all being done to that new standard.
Uh, and we are seeing, uh, significant cost savings from what we otherwise would
have incurred through those changes.
Do you have any number, um, or estimate in mind for
what that saving could be?
Uh, so we can probably get some more detailed numbers for the committee, but for
the Auckland District Court, which is obviously a very large building, in Auckland,
one of our biggest, uh, courts, um, over,
probably north of $10 million saving in terms of that redevelopment.
Just in one court?
Yes, I believe so. Oh, I can confirm that, but that's, that's round figures.
Okay.
So it's significantly, that'll be the biggest one-
Now,
now I'm going to ask- ... and a lot of the others will be small.
I'm going to ask the question on behalf of the member.
What is happening in Whanganui Court?
(laughs)
Mm-hmm.
Is it on schedule? Is it good? It's, what, what's going to happen?
It's fantastic.
We just need to-
It's fantastic. Beautiful site. It's fantastic.
Fantastic, that's good outcome. Thank you. Now I'm going to Mr.
O'Connor.
Oh, thank you, um, Chair. Um, obviously we've talked about Te Reka and,
uh, the courts, all the work going on in the courts' infrastructure.
Mm-hmm.
And particularly the IT infrastructure is going to be an
incredibly important part of that.
Um, but I see you've thrown behind that as one of the areas that,
um, you didn't quite get the tick off on.
Um-
Just in timing for Te Reka?
Yeah, well is it in...
Yeah.
During the, uh, needs improvement.
So, what's happening there-
Well-
... to make sure you're going to be in a position to actually-
So, so we've, we've got work underway with a, a go-to-green plan now, which is
essentially, um, just stepping through the, some of the, the complexity
in, in that space. We had a, so- something of a discussion on this, uh,
earlier. Uh, the build that we were, was
due to be completed at about the end of this month on the Family Court phase.
Well, now that part of the build will be completed in the first-
Mm-hmm.
... yeah, couple of months of next year.
Uh, so that has actually put things back a little bit, but we are doing
that work. And overall, uh, we're really confident with how the project is
tracking. We, uh, going through a go-to-green phase to get it back on-...
uh, basically to reset some of those, those things.
So with the, obviously, anticipation of the whole system going
live, you'll be needing to spend the money now
as you're doing this court work in places like Whanganui, presumably.
Uh, well, the, the, the money we're spending in Whanganui and the money we're
spending on Te Reka are on quite separate, uh, tracks.
We are, we are spending. We clearly, you know, it's a big project that
the, Te Reka project, and there's a lot of money going into that, uh, Victoria's
running team, I think it's about, uh, 60, 70 people at the moment, and then
there's, uh, contractors who are working with us as well.
So there's a, there's, there's no shortage of spend happening in that
space. That's just the nature of building a big project like this.
I, I wonder if I could just add, I, if I understand your question, in all of the
redevelopments and the building projects we're doing, we're building courtrooms for
the future, and so we're thinking about Te Reka and, and what that
physically means, so in terms of the bench, the screens that the judges will need,
and that sort of thing. So we've, um, working with the Te Reka program and our
property team, uh, and the operational team, uh, we've looked
at all the benches across the country in terms of what they'll need for Te Reka and
we're thinking about what, uh, physical changes we'll need to make to courtrooms in
order to enable that.
And you're... When that's happening as these upgrades we've talked about-
Yeah.
... (crosstalk)
Oh, and, and even to the, uh, court square right there and not upgrades.
There still will need to be changes made to some of the courtroom, uh, layout for,
for, to accommodate the new system.
Any more?
I have one.
Okay, I'm gonna stop on that and then I'm going to Mr. Stevenson. Mr. Bateson?
Just to, uh, the member's point about building to the future as
well,
how are you working with police in relation to
the new way of building, like the courthouse in Whanganui, I
don't know if that's happening at Papakura as well, but the integration
and, and those changes that are happening around holding cells and the like?
Uh, so in Whanganui specifically, um, there's, uh, what's called the care
facility, so the custodial facility, um, that will be linked to the new
courthouse. So police are in charge of the custodial suite and the
construction of that. And so their timeline, last updated it was, their timeline's
tracking to ours so that the two will be ready together.
Um, more generally, we work with police, obviously we've got a number of, um,
courthouses are quite old and the custodial suites are very old.
Um, and so we work with police and with Corrections around the needs, um,
of the, the cell blocks, uh, custodial suites, uh, and how
we, how we manage those from a health and safety perspective, recognizing that
we've got some constraints that are, you know, in very old buildings.
In terms of, um, the new builds, uh, we obviously work with police and Corrections
in the design of those custodial suites in terms of the new
design.
Okay, I'm going to Mr. Stevenson.
Yeah, just staying on the topic-
You've got one
more. ... um, of actually looking at your 30-year work program.
Another one on strategy.
I'm lucky enough to live in beautiful Central Otago, um,
but one of the issues we've got here is that, uh, uh, Ministry
of Health and Health New Zealand didn't plan for the massive population growth
there, so Queenstown, Wanaka, Fromwell, masses of
areas. Can you just assure me you've got a plan, um, for making
sure we have appropriate court infrastructure into the future in Central Otago?
Because, uh, I'm looking here, I don't see it there, but you might, I might
have missed a-
This is a day for MPs to lobby.
No, and I think, look, we, and I see Tauranga, but there are areas of New
Zealand we never expected to grow so massively.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
And you know, we are missing vital services.
What's happening in Queenstown?
Yeah.
I, I, I, I kind of might want to add some things to this that-
I can-
But I'll speak to this 'cause the 30-year program that we have on our
building structure now, I, I think is a really, uh, it's, it's a
really deep and thorough piece of work.
It's, it's looking at the state of all our buildings, uh, how fit for purpose
they are in terms of the work that has to come through them, the size of it, the
health and safety. And we're getting a much better sense of where our investment
needs to go. So I think that's part of how we've been able to make the case for
some of the investment that is happening and it's absolutely how we're making the
case, uh, as we, as we look forward.
Part of what we do when we look forward in the courts is try and understand where
the need is going to be, uh, and where the need is
presenting now. Uh, a lot of what's on that 30-year
plan is recognizing the state of the buildings-
Yes. That's
right. ... as they currently are, so as I mentioned, that you're bringing in, as the
extra, uh-
Planning.
... kind of piece that we have to bring into that.
Uh, I've, I've, either of my colleagues might reflect, I don't think we're
suffering from capacity constraints-
No.
... in that part of the world
at the, at the moment.
Good to hear.
Um, uh, so, uh, and I think in the near term
it's not an area that, uh, presents as concern to us, which
would give me some reason to reassure you-
But you haven't forgotten about us?
(laughs)
Oh, we'd never forget about it and we, we find there's no shortage of people happy
to go and have a look down in Central Otago.
That's right. (laughs)
(laughs) (laughs)
Um, can I just add that there is a court in Alexandra
as well?
Mm-hmm.
So one of the advantages of Te Reka which we don't talk about, we're a paper-based
system at the moment so if we want somebody in Queenstown to do something for us,
for Nelson for example-
Yeah. ... you have to courier something or email and scan and muck around with it.
One of the huge advantages of Te Reka is that because the file will be electronic,
the file will be up, somebody will be able to look on a computer screen.
So alls I'm flagging is that from an ongoing property infrastructure perspective,
Te Reka actually creates opportunities, an opportunity to think about things
differently. So for example, the court, uh, staff in Alexandra could do stuff
on behalf of Queenstown without physically having to move or courier stuff
around. So that helps with capacity.
Do you want to go too?
Oh, I was just gonna, just do it more broadly, um, when you talk about the 30-year
plan, one of the things we're doing on a more strategic level is actually starting
to work on how we see demographic shifting and crime rates
shifting, and actually thinking about what is the network plan for the court
system for the future. And so, uh, Auckland's the most obvious one, what's the
population shift in Auckland over the next 20, 30 years?
Uh, and you're thinking about Auckland, then Waikato, Bay of Plenty, and so how's
that whole, um, that whole geographic area going to shift?
And so part of the reason we've developed the new Papakura build in the way that we
have, is to enable... It was in line to potentially future growth
further into South Auckland, so thinking about-...
what shifts we might need to make in the longer term around the network of our
courts.
Right. We're about to finish courts, but I just want to ask Mr.
Connelly if he's got anything else.
(laughs)
I'm just worried about the type of people moving to Queenstown-
Well, I was actually not thinking so much of the criminal jurisdiction, but-
Well, that was an open invitation.
... like for commercial-
Yeah. ... now going to go to firearms
policy. Lots of property disputes on fences.
(laughs)
Firearms. And I'm gonna come here to, uh, Honorable Jenny Smith.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Um, what's the estimated
cost for the restructure of the
FSA?
Uh, we're still working that through, uh, and that's part of conversations
that we're having, uh, with, with police and with ministers at the
moment.
But, so the policy's been announced, but you don't
know what it's gonna cost?
Well, we have some broad estimates, but we're still testing and working
those through-
Gotcha.
... uh, to, to, to get to the detail of that.
Are you able to share what the broad sweep of-
Not, not at this point because we're still, there, it's a very much a, uh, an area
of active discussion.
Is it unusual though to have something that's been
publicly announced by the government that has no cost
tag attached to it at all?
Uh, no. I, I wouldn't say it's unusual.
Certainly, there's been a l- there has been plenty of discussion about cost and
about, uh, what it will take to, uh, enable the, the new
organization to function. Uh, but it's, but it's
intersecting with a, with a budget process where we're looking at all of our costs
and all agencies are, are bringing a, a, a, a pretty keen
fiscal eye to everything that we're doing.
So, there's an interaction there about just how we,
uh, get to the, get to the, the final costings of it.
But there's, it's, it's not that it's, uh, that we've gone blindly into it, it's
that we're still very actively working through just exactly how it will all fall
out.
And would that, that would make a separate budget bid in the next budget?
Uh, we... It's all something that we're discussing in the context of the '26
budget, which is what we're, we're all spending quite a lot of time working on at
the moment.
And, and is there kind of a view that that would come out of a police, uh, vote
police or justice?
You're searching.
As, as I said, it's all part of a budget discussion so, you know, we'll...
It'll, it'll be revealed in due course.
Is there... Last question, sorry.
Is there any estimation, um, but I'm thinking no if you can't tell me the
previous one-
No.
... um, on the wider costs to the justice system of the, all the changes
proposed to the Arms Act? Because there's new penalties, new offenses, there's
a new review committee. The wider cost for implementing all of
those changes, have, have those been calculated at all?
Uh, yeah. Certainly, we've... All of those costs have been looked at in terms of
the advice that's been, uh, prepared.
And so, that's all part of the mix that we're working through at the moment.
Right.
Well, I'm disappointed we can't get the CFO on that one. Right. We're going to Dr.
Sue now.
(laughs)
Thank you.
Same as what he said. (laughs)
Just supplementary on that. In terms of the firearms
reform, what, uh, conversational interactions has the Minister of
Justice had with FIANZ and ICONS?
Sorry, the Minister of Justice with...
Uh, FIANZ and ICONS, so the Federation of Islamic Associations of New Zealand and
also the Islamic Council of New Zealand.
Yeah,
Yeah.
Um-
Um, it'd be the minister, um, the Associate Minister of Justice, uh, on
the, on this one has been leading that process. It's...
I'll just introduce-
Right.
... uh, Cathy Brightwell, who's the policy GM, uh, where
the, uh, firearms work sits.
Mm-hmm. The FIANZ is represented on the Ministerial Arms
Advisory Group. And the minister does meet regularly
with, uh, stakeholders including Muslim community.
Uh, what about ICONS?
Who? I'm sorry. Who are they?
The Islamic Council of New Zealand.
That would be another stakeholder group that she would meet with, but they're not
represented on the Ministerial of- Arms Advisory Group.
But from a min- ministry perspective-
Mm-hmm.
... ministry doesn't go and talk to them and seek their advice?
Yes. We ran a public consultation process back in February
on the Arms Act rewrite-
Mm-hmm.
... and we met with a range of stakeholders, um, stakeholder groups
individually then.
And how-
And they also submitted.
Okay. And how are their concerns, if any, been
addressed and incorporated into the policy setting?
They've informed the policy along with all the other submitters.
Yeah.
Right, yeah. Yeah. Okay. We're going to Mr. Stevenson.
Supplementary just on this.
Mm.
Um, obviously, yeah. There's been...
This has been quite a long process working through this, but could you just
briefly... I mean, can you just give assurance this was a
robust process to develop, uh, this policy and, uh, lots of people
have been engaged?
Good thing you know because-
Well, I mean-
We just mucked around for a bit and bought it.
(laughs)
I think it's worth just getting on the record, this wasn't-
Yeah. A, a proper policy process was followed-
Yeah.
... with the consultation document that was released publicly and we also
ran face-to-face engagements with stakeholder groups.
Yeah.
I, I would also add to that we've worked incredibly closely with police and-
Mm-hmm.
... Arms Act authority.
Thank you.
Can I just... Just one follow-up on that.
When you say that, um, working with stakeholder groups, do you
actively reach out to the stakeholders that are most likely going to be affected
or do you just expect them to come to you?
No, no. We did target specific groups-
Oh, great. Thank you.
... that would have an interest.
Anyone else on firearms before we move on to Sh- Jenny?
Yeah. I, I, I wouldn't mind one. Um,
the, the, the changes you ended up with were substantially
different to the ones that were initially presented,
um, that were the minister's ones.
Um, and in some ways,
um, the, the safety outcomes I think were
stronger. Are you able to speak to anything in terms of, um, how
policy process assisted a safer outcome for all New
Zealanders?
Uh, look, I think it goes to the, uh, uh, Mr. Stevenson's question.
This, this was a very robust policy process.
Mm-hmm.
We did a lot of work on it with our other agencies and with stakeholder
groups. Uh, we had a very engaged, uh, minister, uh, who
I, I, I have to say listened and, and, and put
different perspectives to us and to, to other groups.
Uh, there was a lot of ministerial discussion around it.
And in the end, uh, you can see the result of that in the, in the cabinet papers
and the, and the outcome. I mean, to be honest, as a, as someone who has done
policy for a career, I think this is a really, a really excellent process.
Okay. I'm going to Dr. Duncan Webb. Do you have some on strategy? For this ...
Yeah. Look, just one question. Um-
And this is, th, it is the time for asking awkward questions but
it's around your leadership group.
Um, I, I just was reading your annual report and then I
just- (laughs)
(laughs)
They've all left the table now. (laughs)
Yeah, they've all left really quickly.
Mm-hmm.
So, you've had three, um, senior
Dep Secs leave in, about 18 months, in, since
20, since January '24, um, and there were,
uh, and you've a- actually had a couple leave a little bit before
that. So, you've had, you've had a massive amount of turnover in your
leadership team. I was curious that, you'd, you,
'cause I asked some questions around this, um,
and you weren't that eager to give any
insights into why that might be. But I guess my
question is, you know, what risks does that present?
Because as I see it, you've got lots of people who have been, some have been in the
ministry for a while, your leadership team's really new.
I actually, not sure I'd characterize it like that.
I mean, the, and, uh, for start I, I think relative to levels of
turnover in many leadership teams across the public service, I, I
doubt that I'm near the, the top of the pack.
We had a, we had a Dep Sec who, uh, returned to the Netherlands.
Uh, uh, I had a, a Dep Sec who went off to be the chief executive of the Crown
Response, uh, Unit. Uh, and I had a, a Dep
Sec, uh, who, who chose to, uh, leave and pursue other,
uh, opportunities. I've got still quite a lot of experience, uh, around
the table, uh, and, and I, and, and I think
it's, I, it feels to me like quite a, a healthy level of,
um, of being freshened up-
But you think that level of turnover-
Mm?
... 'cause it's, it's like five in four years. I think.
Well-
I'm pretty sure it is.
Well, it depends how far, how far back you go.
So, we, we dropped, we, we, we, we, my leadership team
was, uh, uh, smaller than it was, uh, we,
through our restructuring in the 2024, uh, phase.
We, we took one, uh, leadership position out.
Yeah, that's right.
Uh, and, um, and in the time that I've been there
I've, uh, well, you go back a few years now when I'd,
I'd created a few others. I, so I'm, I'm surprised that, that it
looks that way to you because I think it's, uh, uh, it's a, it's a, it's
a, it would be a pretty normal level of turnover.
All right, we'll have to do some . Thank you.
Okay, I'm going to, last question from Ms. Ngapeti and then we're gonna move on.
Supplementary to the, the Honorable Duncan-Webb's question.
Um, Minister Kiwi, Kiwi-Wright. Um,
so you were mentioning earlier, uh, backlog in, backlog in
courts, um, has, has dropped, the number has dropped.
Active Koraoneo cases, dropped. Dispute tribunal
cases, fallen. Um, Māori victimization,
as we mentioned earlier, down. Fine collections revenue up by
24%. Active Koraoneo case loads, as we said, minus
12%. Uh, legal aid eligibility increased
93,000 people. Uh, average civil case age
minus 35%. These are pretty good numbers.
For someone, um,
that, uh, obje- objectively speaking would you say that this is
reflective that the management is actually in a very good space
where, where receive- where, um, results like this
are pretty outstanding?
Oh, oh that's the, that's the loveliest question I've ever had.
(laughs)
He specializes in
that. And I'm enjoying it as well.
(laughing)
Bask in the glory!
Not that calm.
But you've, but, but you... I may I add that you said in your opening remarks,
"Much under a tight fiscal environment."
That's right, actually.
That's right.
So, kudos to you.
Um, no look, thank you. I genuinely thank you for that question.
So look, if, if you connect that, I, I would, I would say I'm, I'm lucky to
have a, a leadership team around me and, and, and working to them
and a body of, of, of staff throughout the ministry that are really
committed to doing what they do. Uh, I think-
I just want
to say when- ... we have made really good progress in a lot of areas.
I think there's, there's still a ho- a lot of stuff that is really hard.
I don't, I don't wander home each evening thinking, "Well, we've
nailed that."
Because I think there's a huge amount of work still to be done in this
sector.
And I think that would be the view that my leadership team has and the people that
report to them. So, look, I, I think we have a lot of different
views. We, we disagree quite a lot, uh, and I think that's a
constructive and, and creative thing around the table.
But I'm, I'm lucky to be working with the people that I'm working with.
Okay, we're n- now going to put you back on the rack.
Yeah. (laughs)
We're gonna talk about timel- timeliness to access
to justice, and update on the legal aid review.
Members? I'm gonna go with Dr. Sunam.
Got some numbers. Uh, yeah
And then, you a-
I want to start with, uh, I guess the, the timeliness.
And I think first of all, I think it's really heartening to see, um, the
support, uh, well actually, the, the
cross-board support for increasing the number of High Court judges to
65.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I want to start with how that is going to
look in terms of the respondents. I wanna particularly pick up on,
um, page 20 of the report. Oh
God, I've now lost page 20 of the report.
Which does say that for certain groups the satisfaction is down, and we're
looking at disabled respondents, people in criminal proceedings
and Māori respondents that they're still lower than average.
Sorry, they're not down, they're lower than average.
Um, what then are you doing in terms of, from a access to justice perspective of
lifting some of this?
Well...
... please.
Uh, look, again, thank you, thank you for that, that question.
I th- there are, there are some real challenges still in the court system.
I think the court system is difficult for people with disabilities.
Yeah.
Uh, I, I think it, it can be a, a quite
foreign and difficult environment to try and, and step your way
through. I think the same applies for people who don't have English as a first
language, uh, and who may not be familiar with some of the ways that our systems
work. So, I would absolutely say that these numbers are a,
uh, an indication of an area that we have to keep focused on and that we have to
keep, uh, concentrating, uh, on. So, we...
Though it, there would... Certainly, we, we work with the judiciary in this space.
A lot of what happens here, uh, is, is due to some
things that are judicially led. I think our partnership-
Mmm.
... uh, with the judiciary is really important, uh, in this, uh, in this space.
The, the chief justice is a, uh, is a very strong,
uh, advocate and, um, champion of,
uh, the disabled, uh, community and actually all people who struggle
to, uh, access the court. Uh, some of the practical things that
we're doing in this space, uh, uh, and I, I'd get
Karl to, to add in a little bit more texture to this, but Te
Maruma is, is designed to create an environment in
court where people can be heard, which is, which is more responsive
to the particular circumstances that, that individuals, uh, bring
with them into the court space. And so I think it's absolutely
a, a, an intent where... And, and some of Te Maruma
is being limited to the eight courts that we're rolling out.
Some of it is being mainstreamed across the country.
There is guidance for, uh, the judges about how they engage in the court
with, with, with people. Uh, we've done a bit of work with, um,
interpreters over the, over the last few years.
It's still an area that's, uh, quite, uh, tricky.
We're interested in where the technology can, uh, add and to be
supportive of us, uh, in, uh, that space.
And at this point, I might invite Karl, uh, to add some further
texture.
So, um, just... And it comes a little bit to your earlier question about Te
Maruma. So as Andrew said, there's, there are things in Te Maruma that cost money,
there are things that you can do without costing money.
So, one of those is plain language.
So, pla- if you, if you've been in a court, it's...
If you don't know the terminology, it can be very jargonish and complex.
Mmm.
So, um, in plain language from a Te Maruma perspective is not just for Te
Maruma, that will be for everybody.
From all ethnicities and for whatever, uh, abilities they do and- don't have.
One of the processes or, uh, pieces of work we're doing from an
infrastructure... I'm gonna promote the chair and say, "You're the
judge." So, I don't... It's promotion, I
think. (laughs)
Is it? (laughs)
Anyway, you would normally sit on a bench.
Yeah.
In Te Al- Te Maruma courts, it is more like this, where people
were sitting in a different type of environment which is more conducive to the
interaction that the court may feel they need at the time.
For, uh, disability specifically, 'cause you asked about that, we are...
We'll be introducing a training program for all staff in the, in the courts in the
next calendar year about, uh, better out- a better
ability to deal with people with disabilities as an-
Just a moment. ... hard example of what we're going to do.
And how would that... How, how would, for example,
neurodivergency and things like autism or FAD DS,
et cetera, be manifested in... Is that part of that package of disabil-
Um,
we're, we're still designing the package, so I can't give you-
Okay.
... all the detail, the ins and outs of it, so-
We look forward to it then.
Just- Can I-
I was nearly going to come back to some things-
Can I ask a short question? But yeah, neurodiversity and, uh, and, and
any range of mental health issues are absolutely a big part of,
of, of what people bring to the court.
Uh, and in fact, the majority of people who would appear before the criminal court
will s- will suffer from some form of, um, neurological disability
often.
In terms of, uh-
Have you got mine?
... in terms of physical disability, are you funded in your new court-
You
want one? ... court bill to make them sort of fully accessible?
Yes.
That's right, yep.
Yep. Okay, thank you. That's
it. Okay. Going to Ms. Walters.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, and congratulations on some of the improvements
to timeliness.
Mm. Very good.
Um, however... (laughs)
(laughs)
... I did notice that with respect to the Human Rights Review Tribunal, and this is
obviously the court that hears health and disability matters, privacy matters,
discrimination matters, that in this year's budget, there's been a
reduction in the number of decision makers.
And from what I've heard, existing wait times can be between two
and three years. And, and from OAs, I understand the minister wa-
was engaged in a recruitment process to fill those roles.
So, what do you think that, that decision will do to the timeliness for those
important cases?
Can I, can I just... Because there's, there's been quite a lot of
discussion about timeliness, so I might just
make a more general point before I answer that question specifically, which I think
is probably quite important to make because the, the, the,
there's a... We made a lot of really good progress.
If, if, if it was a, the judiciary member, senior heads of bench
sitting here or members of the profession, they would say to you
that the courts are really hard at the moment because there has been a...
The effort that has gone in, uh, h- is creating, I think, some
real pressure on all parts of the, the system.
So, I would... I, I just wouldn't wanna us in any way to
come across as if you're insmug about this timeliness.
We're really proud of the gains that we've made, but they have been
hard-won with efforts of, of all of the participants
and, and I think there are some stress, uh, issues that do appear
across the court system as a consequence of that.
So, I just wanted to, um, just make sure that that was recorded,
uh, for the committee. In respect to the HRT, the, the problem here
is that, is that, is that... Is as you have described it, but
it's, it's, it's a straightforward function of, uh, a
short-term... Or a decision that had a, a, a limited, uh,
duration being made to increase the number of, um, deputy
chairs that was designed to deal with some of those-... backlogs.
It was, it was, it was, it was a certain amount of money that was put in
for a certain amount of time-
Yeah.
... and then there was a, there was an end to it.
So, what has happened is that we have made progress on the backlog in the
HRT through that period of, of having additional resource.
And I would actually also really acknowledge the efforts of the chair and others,
because they have changed their processes as well in order to
improve, uh, the, their, the speed of their judgments, but
there is still a backlog, uh, there.
What's happened is essentially that that short-term funding has come to an end, and
it's a decision w- we haven't h- had the ability to keep those
funds going into the future.
Right, I'm gonna-
On that-
Okay, I'm going to go to Mr. Stevenson, who's got a new line. What's that?
Yeah. Anybody else want to finish what we were
Do you want to-
Just about the Human Rights Tribunal.
Yeah.
Um, so we're in constant conversations with the chair of the tribunal, obviously,
because of the deputy chair reductions.
Um, 'cause there has been a, a reduction in backlog overall and
the active aged cases also dropped by over 10%.
So, um, and we're talking about different practice process and possible
leg changes that might actually ensure that we actually don't lose anything-
Sure.
... um, with the reduction in the resource.
And
so, I won't speak for her, but at the moment, she's not panicking about the
reduction. She's concerned, but she thinks if we do some other things, we might be
able to maintain, um, performance at its current levels.
All right, I'll go to Mr. O'Connor, and then I'll go to a new question over here.
Just while we're on timeliness, um, what, what's the average disposal
time for cases
that
reflects the reduction
in the waiting list?
Uh, so there's three different timeliness targets, uh, for the civil criminal
space. So, they're different depending on what c- obviously, what your category
is. So they're different for your category, so Bex is gonna let you know what the
three-
Just specifically around the disposal times.
Yeah.
... are. Yeah. So, um, one of the big changes when we moved to the timeliness was to change
how we measure it. And, uh, there's different thresholds for different case
types about what was, constitutes timely.
So, for category one, it's six months.
For category two and three chats, uh, it
is nine months and 15 months for jury.
And so, we don't do the average disposal time as, as that
is a bit generalized and doesn't really take into account the nuance of different
cases. Um, and but what we can say is that now, 83% of all cases
that were disposed were timely.
So, the category three ones, are they taking longer to dispose of?
Would that be, would that be-
No. Because a year ago, uh, we were only at 80%
timely.
Okay. Uh, and so we're now at 83%, which is saying that cases are
generally moving through the court more-
Oh,
so you sh- ... in a more timely way.
Oh, so you, but you can't tell category three case- the more serious
cases, you can't tell from those stats whether they are
taking longer to dispose
Oh, they're taking less. So, we do have the sub-measures as well.
And, and more of those cases are also timely than they were a year ago.
All right, thank you.
Okay, we're going to Legal Aid. Mr. Stevenson?
A few, few questions on Legal Aid, if that's okay.
Obviously, there's been quite a, uh, you know, particularly under the period under
review and even obviously into this financial, there's been quite an
increase in Legal Aid. Um, and I appreciate
it's, you know, it's demand-driven, but you obviously still have to budget for
it.
But what, yeah, what work have you done to try and better understand what is
driving that increase in the uptake of legal aid
costs, and yeah, how are you get- how basically are you going to try and plan for
that for the future and get a better, um-
Yeah, that's-
... grasp of what's going to happen?
... I think the work on Legal Aid is one of the most important pieces of work we
have underway at the moment. We, we put a consultation document out
last year, um, r- recognizing both what you've described,
that actually the, the amount of expenditure on Legal Aid is increasing
faster than the rate of inflation over the last five years.
Y- you talk to people in the system, and they will tell you that it's harder than
it's, uh, ever, ever been. And, and there's a, you know, there's
a range of different things going on in that space. So, we...
And I'll get Caroline to talk about it a little further.
We did a significant consultation document.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, we got advice from it. We got a lot of engagement and feedback.
Uh, we, we have advice with ministers at the moment,
uh, as to what changes we might be able to make in this space.
I, I think there will be a fair bit of iteration before we come to
decisions, but there'll be decisions made in the early part of, uh, of next
year. I probably said everything that you wanted to say.
(laughs)
Well, yeah, I mean-
Yeah.
... supplementary would be, um...
Yeah, because I mean, obviously I get contacted, not that often, but sometimes,
I mean, there hasn't really been for lawyers, people being paid by Legal
Aid.
There hasn't been a change in Legal Aid rates for quite some time.
Okay.
Um, and so there's obviously a, an issue there with
sustainability. And so, that is one of the areas I'm sure you're looking at and
yeah, any initial thoughts? Oh, well, well, a couple of questions.
One, did you get good engagement from the legal fraternity?
We did, yep.
Um, and then yeah, any initial thoughts on what can be done
there?
We absolutely got good engagement.
Um, it'll be no surprise that Legal Aid scheme is something that the legal
profession, uh, has a lot of interest in-
Yeah.
... and a lot, a lot to share in terms of their thoughts about it.
So, we got, we got about, we got over 100 submissions, more like
120. Uh, and some of the key things, uh, would, would not be a
surprise. So about, um... And lots of this is public.
The legal profession speak publicly about, um, uh, the Legal Aid
scheme, the level of remuneration, um, uh,
the, the, um, succession plan for the profession, the need to bring,
uh, younger lawyers through-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, and support lawyers as they come through, um, and flexibility around, um,
the how the profession works. So, there are a lot of themes, um, from the
profession. Um, we're working with that with ministers at the moment, in terms
of, uh, what comes out of that review.
Yeah, it's-
Better?
Sorry, just a quick supplementary.
Oh, mate.
Um- That's good.
'Cause it is a fairly... I mean, I used to be a lawyer a long time ago.
It's actually a fairly, um, archaic way of,
uh... You're basically you're pay- you're paying by the hour, et
cetera. Yeah, did any themes come through about different ways to
remunerate?
... um, and legal aid-
Mm-hmm.
... because it is, yeah.
Uh, l-lots of suggestions.
Okay.
There's a, there's a broad range of suggestions and comments from legal aid.
Pay us more.
Yeah.
So... (laughs)
And, and different ways of constructing
it. They already do, they already do job rates.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
They already do job rates-
Yeah.
... in the criminal sphere. Um, can I? Yep, you go. Just one clarification.
You said that, um, Mr., uh,
White, you said that the costs are increasing
faster than the rate of inflation.
Is that per capita costs or just gross?
Because spend per citizen is a lot better, more
informative than spend across the country, right?
I, I think, I think it'll be both. I mean, uh, the numbers I've, I've got in my
head, and I'll ask Henry or others to correct me if I get these wrong, is that
in, uh, 2018/'19, the
legal aid, uh, cost was about $179 million.
In, uh, the current year it's about, uh, $320 million-
Right.
... give or take a little bit.
Okay.
Is
he right, Henry? So that's actually a really, that's a really material increase.
Very good.
Yeah,
yeah. Yeah, yeah.
And so, so we've, we've, we've actually got a lot of work to do in this space
because I don't think... You know, I, you know, I, we deal with some
bouquets earlier, I don't think the system is working in a way that, that
justifies that increase in expenditure.
Yeah. Um,
so, I mean, one of the real pinch points is duty solicitors, right?
Mm-hmm.
Um, and I see they're going on strike, uh, in Auckland in
January, so there're gonna, there's gonna be no one, uh, in court to
help p- people out. Um, have y- have you got any
particular... And I see in Blenheim there's no duty solicitor, on the West Coast
there's no duty solicitor, so people have to travel from Christchurch to do
that. Have you got any particular strategies in place to address those problems?
We're, we're thinking about duty solicitors in the context of the work we're doing
on the legal aid review-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
... so the, the points you make are, are points that are absolutely we're aware of
and that came up in the legal aid review.
Mm-hmm.
So this, this will be a big topic of conversation next year, I'm sure of
that.
Okay, good to know. Yeah, because you talk about
inflation rates. Since 2006, the
duty solicitor rate has risen in total
by 7%,
whereas wages have gone up by around 80% in that period.
Mm-hmm.
Are you addre- going to address that?
As I say, we're looking at the, uh, duty lawyer scheme, sustainability of that
scheme as part of what we're doing.
Okay, I'm going over here,
but- Well, last one, last one.
Last one. (laughs)
Are you considering, are you considering a public defender duty solicitor
type scheme? We're a-
Well, we, we have the public defense service already.
I know, but they don't do... They-
They do some duty lawyer service. Not m- not that much.
So, we're, we're looking at the duty lawyer.
I mean, all I'd say is the legal aid review, we're, we're thinking about the duty
lawyer scheme as well.
Right. We're going to Mr. Renniford.
Yeah, I'm keen to ask about, uh, prospective change from
a decrease in the number of jury trials to judge-alone trials
and whether that's, uh, an item of work that you've been considering
at present.
Well, you, you'll recall there was a discussion document about the, um, uh,
jury trials, would it have been-
It was about a year ago.
18 months ago, a year ago?
Yeah,
yeah. Yeah. Uh, and, and so, you know, that, that is
an, an area that, um, ministers haven't taken decisions on, uh,
at, at this point. Uh, it's, it's certainly a- an issue that
as officials we're still interested in.
What do some of our comparable overseas partners
do? E.g., what does Australia do, Canada, the UK?
Um-
UK, so I see a throwback there.
You try, I'll get, I'll get, uh, Caroline to, to give you a little bit
more of the texture on that.
Well, well it's really timely just in the sense that there's news coming out of the
United Kingdom-
Mm-hmm.
... about a decision to move to, um, uh, uh,
limiting jury trials to very serious offenses
only.
Mm-hmm.
And I, as I understand it, and like I said, it's h- it's hot off the press news,
um, but where there's a sentence for, um, three years or more, um,
imprisonment. So, um, so we're-
That's- ... we're watching the UK with, um, with interest around, uh, where they're
heading, um, with that, yeah.
So, currently in New Zealand, correct me if I'm wrong, but if your sentence carries
two years or more-
That's
right. ... you have the choice between a judge or a jury trial.
Yeah.
You're saying the UK has moved to say-
Well, they just announced intention-
But the, and even then they're still-
Yeah.
I'm not 100% sure of the status of those an- announcements, so.
No, they were, 'cause there was one, um, there was a report-
Yeah.
... last week that, uh, proposed a five-year, so, um-
Mm-hmm.
... jury trials only if the, uh, penalty is five years' imprisonment or more.
Yeah.
And in l- like Literacy, it's just h- hot off the press what we've just seen is a,
a potential decision for three years, uh,
yeah. But, uh, it, it is an, an issue. One of the things that shapes, uh, timeliness is
the jury election rate, yeah?
Yeah, no, 100%.
Uh, and, and across the country, our jury election rates are,
quite different. In some courts they're increasing and, and that is an
issue that puts pressure on the system because a jury trial takes, uh,
a lot longer. So we're, uh, we're really interested in looking, and we are working
and engaging with the profession about that.
If you were to move to, um, say to increase the
threshold-
Mm-hmm.
... um, from the two years to whatever it might be, whether three years or five
years or whatever it is, would that increase the timeliness of the court
system in New Zealand?
Uh, uh, yes, it would. Um, I mean, yeah, that's, th- those
are, that, that's, I think, is, just a statement o- of fact there'd, there'd be
quite a lot of discussion before we got to a decision at that point.
Thank you.
All right, last one from Mr. Bateson, then we're going into the very last item by
Willy. Thanks, Chair.
Um, just want to acknowledge the, uh, idea that came from a visit to
the Auckland Court, um, last year- Oh, not Whanganui. Not Whanganui.
Um, but it did lead, Chair, to my member's bill, as I'm sure you're
aware, on increasing the age of automatic excusal for
jury-
Mm-hmm.
... um, service to 72, which is currently going through the House.
Just, um, wanted to ask if you're prepared,
um, for the introduction, um,
of that- Actually, that's, I have a general-
... for it pass, um-
Absolutely.
... in
soon
timeframe.
Absolutely, always prepared.
Yeah. Already?
Yeah, already
Easy enough to implement?
Uh, well, not th-
We'll be ready to go on the day we need to be ready to go. We're very good at that.
Good. Right. Now, we're going to the last item, which is general,
uh, items. The first one is the Bill of Rights Act report.
That
was me. That's you.
That's me.
Dr Sunan?
Because I've been trying to get a response to this for a while, and every...
I get ping-ponged by different departments.
(laughs)
But I've been told-
We'll get you.
... it's Ministry of Justice. So, I've noticed, um, with
sort of reasonably alarming frequency that the BORA
report, or consistency with BORA, with Section 7 report, is not
uploaded on-
Correct.
... the Ministry of Justice website.
For f- when first reading takes place.
Even worse, I can name the specific legislation, which is the Outer
Space and High Altitude Amendment Bill, that the BORA report was
not available until it passed.
That's your problem, Mr Kivewai.
Well, I'm, I'm gonna invite my deep seat policy, Caroline Grady, to talk to this
issue. We take the BORA stuff very seriously.
Um, just so, um, uh, just so I'm clear,
uh, under the, under the Bill of Rights Act, the Section 7 reports, which
are reports from the Attorney-General-
Yeah.
... when the Attorney-General considers that there is something in the bill
that is inconsistent with the Bill of Rights Act-
Yeah.
So, what the law requires, as you probably know, is that the Attorney-General
presents her advice to the House on introduction.
And so, um, the key way in which their advice is made available, particularly to
the public, is the Attorney-General presenting her advice to the
House. We-
Mm-hmm.
... understand the, uh, public interest and the importance of,
um, also putting it on our website, and we do our best to.
The, uh, this is not a, this is not a, um, does not (laughs)
W- who is it? Who is it for you're pushing?
Um, uh,
sometimes when the bill is from an agency other than ourselves-
Yeah.
... our ability to, uh, uh... with not the information
flow to us that that bill has been introduced-
Yeah.
... uh, we're reliant on people telling us.
We have recently put in place a direct link into the Clerk of the
House, uh, so we get a direct feed of when-
Perfect answer.
But otherwise, we're not (overlapping dialogue)
Sorry, just, just to follow up. That's...
What you said was for Section 7 rep-
Correct.
What about consistency report against BORA?
So, um, the non-Section 7 reports?
That's legal advice.
So, the, um, the, the reports where the Attorney-General-
So that's any report, any BORA report.
Um, when the attorney hasn't considered that it's in breach.
Yeah.
Yes. So, um, so same thing, it's not a legal requirement on us.
No.
Uh, we do our very best. What I understand is that we increasingly have them on the
website within a day of it being introduced, and that's how
we put this process in place for the Clerk of the House (overlapping dialogue)
Well, that's a good thing. We're gonna have to go for a second.
Right, we've got Mrs Walters.
Very quickly, um, I have a concern that people selected for statutory
appointments are capable and competent to do those appointments.
There have been times recently where people have been deemed not
suitable for appointment by the Ministry of Justice.
Do you think we have a problem, and should we be considering a different
statutory appointments process?
No, we d- we do a lot of appointments.
Some of those are JPs and other sorts of things.
So, so we, we're quite thoughtful about all of the different appointment processes
that we have. Uh, you know,
you... I think it's really important that, that,
that we do all of the right referee checks.
But it will be a little bit dependent on the nature of the role that's being
appointed into. And I do think there's a need for us to make sure we,
we calibrate, or we will just put an awful lot of resource, uh,
into, uh, into following things up. So, we're really mindful of it.
We, we look at our different appointment processes and, and we're thoughtful about
them.
Is that it?
I, I, I think you do a fantastic job.
I think the problem lies in the fact that having done that job, people deemed
unsuitable for appointment are then appointed by ministers.
Well, that's a comment. That's not a question.
Right, Dr Duncan-Webb, last question.
Um,
I guess I'll, I'll, I'll give you the short version.
Y- you know, we got rid of Section 27 reports, and we've seen a bump in, um,
alcohol and drug reports, psychologist reports.
And also, it appears, um, lawyers putting in extra claims,
uh, up for legal aid. H- are we basically
erasing the fiscal gains from getting S- 27 reports by the
proliferation of these reports? And then, the second leg of the question is, or
increasing delays 'cause those other reports take so much longer?
Mm-hmm. Uh, no, I th- I think, um, there has
been some offsetting, but certainly I don't think it would, uh, erase
the, the full gains. The issue about, uh, more re- uh, you know, reports
basically being paid for through legal aid that are not Section 27 reports, uh,
again, that's something that we're gonna have a look at through the, the legal aid,
uh, process. There's a broader issue about reports which are causing
delays. You know, there's a range of different sorts of reports that are causing
delays, whether they're psych reports or, or, or, or, or
a, uh, well, quite a number. And I think that, again, is an issue that, that
we're aware of and that we're, we're looking at.
But w- but our, our view is not that the, the defunding of the
Section 27 reports has, has caused a, a, a
big, um, sort of flow of problems.
Okay. So, I wanna s... Do you want one?
Just one more.
Okay.
She wants the last question.
Super quick.
Yeah, just, um, super quick. Um, you know, I went through the list of all the great
results you've managed to achieve recently-
Oh, dear.
... um, and thank you for that. There's still a lot more to do.
But you said this shows that we can make changes and traction.
Yeah.
Um, when, when, when, uh, an organization is given targets
and given a more clearer way to focus, does that have a positive
effect on bringing down numbers or raising up the good
numbers, as you mentioned earlier?
Is it, is it, um, you know, having focus and having
targets?
There, there's a real science in targets. They...
You know, targets done poorly can be very counterproductive.
Targets done well can absolutely, uh, focus effort and the
like. And the timeliness space, uh, I think the fact that the district court hasn't
set a tag- the chief district judge hasn't set a target but he has set a
standard, and that has enabled us across the
system to rally around that, and it has unquestionably brought a
focus for us that has helped us, uh,
basically bring a coordinated, uh, suite of actions to try and
improve things.
Awesome, thank you.
Right, Mr Kivewai, I wanna thank you and your team.
You have faced nigh on 200 questions.
I've just tallied it up.
Whoa.
I think that Andy got off very lightly, but, um-
He did, yeah. (laughs) And I, I'd like to offer the committee the opportunity to
ask anything of him now. (laughs)
(laughs) All right, we'll see you next year.
Well, you'll see me in five minutes.
No, he has to stay.
(laughs) Exactly.
But, well... Okay. We've got a short break?
Thank, thank you.
We'll have a short break. We'll be back at five past.
Yep.